<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>Thomas Jefferson</title>
                <author><name reg="Merwin, Henry Childs">Henry Childs Merwin</name></author>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date value="2010-06-28">June 28, 2010</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>33011</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p></p>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="en" />
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2010-06-28">June 28, 2010</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by <name>Stefan Cramme</name>
                    and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        .bold        { font-weight: bold }
        .center      { text-align: center }
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .antiqua     { font-weight: bold }
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
        figure       { text-align: center }
        head         { text-align: center }
        @media pdf   {
         .small      { width: 40% }
                     }
      </pgStyleSheet>
        <pgCharMap formats="txt">
            <char id="U0x2009">
        <charName>thinsp</charName>
        <desc>THIN SPACE</desc>
        <mapping></mapping>
    </char>
        </pgCharMap>
        
    </pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
<front>
    <div>
        <divGen type="pgheader"/>
    </div>
    <div>
        <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>
<div rend="center; page-break-before: always">
<pb/>
<p><hi rend="antiqua">The Riverside Biographical Series</hi>
</p>
<p>NUMBER 5</p>
<p><hi rend="font-size: large">THOMAS JEFFERSON</hi></p>
<p>BY</p>
<p>HENRY CHILDS MERWIN</p>
<pb/>
<pb/>
<pb/>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p>[Illustration: Th. Jefferson]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><figure url="images/i004.jpg" rend="width: 100%"><figDesc>Th. Jefferson</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
</div>
<titlePage rend="center; page-break-before: right">
<pb/>
<docTitle>
    <titlePart type="main"><hi rend="font-size: xx-large">THOMAS JEFFERSON</hi></titlePart>
<lb/><lb/>
</docTitle>
<byline>BY<lb/><lb/>
<docAuthor><hi rend="font-size: large">HENRY CHILDS MERWIN</hi></docAuthor></byline>
<lb/><lb/>
<figure url="images/i005.png" rend="small"><figDesc>Publisher's emblem</figDesc></figure>
<lb/><lb/>
<docImprint><publisher>HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY<lb/>
<hi rend="font-size: small">Boston: 4 Park Street; New York: 11 East Seventeenth Street<lb/>
Chicago: 378-388 Wabash Avenue</hi></publisher><lb/>
<publisher><hi rend="antiqua">The Riverside Press, Cambridge</hi></publisher>
</docImprint>  
</titlePage>
<div rend="center; page-break-before: always">
<pb/>
<p rend="font-size: small">COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY HENRY C. MERWIN</p>
<p rend="font-size: small">ALL RIGHTS RESERVED</p>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/>

<head>CONTENTS</head>

<table rend="tblcolumns: 'r lw(34m) r'; latexcolumns: 'rp{5cm}r'">
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-size: x-small">CHAP.</hi></cell>
<cell></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-size: x-small">PAGE</hi></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">I.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Youth and Training</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg1">1</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">II.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Virginia in Jefferson’s Day</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg16">16</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">III.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Monticello and its Household</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg28">28</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">IV.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Jefferson in the Revolution</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg36">36</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">V.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Reform Work in Virginia</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg45">45</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VI.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Governor of Virginia</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg59">59</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Envoy at Paris</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg71">71</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">&nbsp;VIII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Secretary of State</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg82">82</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">IX.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Two Parties</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg98">98</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">X.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>President Jefferson</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg114">114</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XI.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Second Presidential Term</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg130">130</ref></cell>
</row>
    <row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>A Public Man in Private Life</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg149">149</ref></cell>
</row>
</table>
   <pb/> 
</div>
</front>
<body rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="1"/><anchor id="Pg1"/>

<head>THOMAS JEFFERSON</head>
<div>
<index index="toc" level1="I. Youth and Training"/><index index="pdf" level1="I. Youth and Training"/>
<head>I</head>

<head type="sub">YOUTH AND TRAINING</head>

<p>
Thomas Jefferson was born upon a
frontier estate in Albemarle County, Virginia,
April 13, 1743. His father, Peter
Jefferson, was of Welsh descent, not of aristocratic
birth, but of that yeoman class which
constitutes the backbone of all societies.
The elder Jefferson had uncommon powers
both of mind and body. His strength was
such that he could simultaneously <q>head
up</q>—that is, raise from their sides to an
upright position—two hogsheads of tobacco,
weighing nearly one thousand pounds apiece.
Like Washington, he was a surveyor; and
there is a tradition that once, while running
his lines through a vast wilderness, his assistants
gave out from famine and fatigue,
<pb n="2"/><anchor id="Pg2"/>and Peter Jefferson pushed on alone, sleeping
at night in hollow trees, amidst howling
beasts of prey, and subsisting on the flesh
of a pack mule which he had been obliged
to kill.
</p>

<p>
Thomas Jefferson inherited from his father
a love of mathematics and of literature.
Peter Jefferson had not received a classical
education, but he was a diligent reader of a
few good books, chiefly Shakespeare, The
Spectator, Pope, and Swift; and in mastering
these he was forming his mind on great
literature after the manner of many another
Virginian,—for the houses of that colony
held English books as they held English
furniture. The edition of Shakespeare (and
it is a handsome one) which Peter Jefferson
used is still preserved among the heirlooms
of his descendants.
</p>

<p>
It was probably in his capacity of surveyor
that Mr. Jefferson made the acquaintance
of the Randolph family, and he soon became
the bosom friend of William Randolph, the
young proprietor of Tuckahoe. The Randolphs
had been for ages a family of con<pb n="3"/><anchor id="Pg3"/>sideration in the midland counties of England,
claiming descent from the Scotch Earls
of Murray, and connected by blood or marriage
with many of the English nobility. In
1735 Peter Jefferson established himself as
a planter by patenting a thousand acres of
land in Goochland County, his estate lying
near and partly including the outlying hills,
which form a sort of picket line for the
Blue Mountain range. At the same time
his friend William Randolph patented an
adjoining estate of twenty-four hundred
acres; and inasmuch as there was no good
site for a house on Jefferson’s estate, Mr.
Randolph conveyed to him four hundred
acres for that purpose, the consideration expressed
in the deed, which is still extant,
being <q>Henry Weatherbourne’s biggest
bowl of Arrack punch.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here Peter Jefferson built his house, and
here, three years later, he brought his bride,—a
handsome girl of nineteen, and a kinswoman
of William Randolph, being Jane,
oldest child of Isham Randolph, then Adjutant-General
of Virginia. She was born in
<pb n="4"/><anchor id="Pg4"/>London, in the parish of Shadwell, and Shadwell
was the name given by Peter Jefferson
to his estate. This marriage was a fortunate
union of the best aristocratic and yeoman
strains in Virginia.
</p>

<p>
In the year 1744 the new County of Albemarle
was carved out of Goochland County,
and Peter Jefferson was appointed one of
the three justices who constituted the county
court and were the real rulers of the shire.
He was made also Surveyor, and later Colonel
of the county. This last office was regarded
as the chief provincial honor in Virginia, and
it was especially important when he held it,
for it was the time of the French war, and
Albemarle was in the debatable land.
</p>

<p>
In the midst of that war, in August,
1757, Peter Jefferson died suddenly, of a
disease which is not recorded, but which was
probably produced by fatigue and exposure.
He was a strong, just, kindly man, sought
for as a protector of the widow and the
orphan, and respected and loved by Indians
as well as white men. Upon his deathbed
he left two injunctions regarding his son
<pb n="5"/><anchor id="Pg5"/>Thomas: one, that he should receive a classical
education; the other, that he should
never be permitted to neglect the physical
exercises necessary for health and strength.
Of these dying commands his son often
spoke with gratitude; and he used to say
that if he were obliged to choose between
the education and the estate which his father
gave him, he would choose the education.
Peter Jefferson left eight children, but only
one son besides Thomas, and that one died
in infancy. Less is known of Jefferson’s
mother; but he derived from her a love of
music, an extraordinary keenness of susceptibility,
and a corresponding refinement
of taste.
</p>

<p>
His father’s death left Jefferson his own
master. In one of his later letters he says:
<q>At fourteen years of age the whole care
and direction of myself were thrown on myself
entirely, without a relative or a friend
qualified to advise or guide me.</q>
</p>

<p>
The first use that he made of his liberty
was to change his school, and to become a
pupil of the Rev. James Maury,—an ex<pb n="6"/><anchor id="Pg6"/>cellent clergyman and scholar, of Huguenot
descent, who had recently settled in Albemarle
County. With him young Jefferson
continued for two years, studying Greek and
Latin, and becoming noted, as a schoolmate
afterward reported, for scholarship, industry,
and shyness. He was a good runner, a
keen fox-hunter, and a bold and graceful
rider.
</p>

<p>
At the age of sixteen, in the spring of
1760, he set out on horseback for Williamsburg,
the capital of Virginia, where he proposed
to enter the college of William and
Mary. Up to this time he had never seen
a town, or even a village, except the hamlet
of Charlottesville, which is about four miles
from Shadwell. Williamsburg—described
in contemporary language as <q>the centre of
taste, fashion, and refinement</q>—was an
unpaved village, of about one thousand inhabitants,
surrounded by an expanse of dark
green tobacco fields as far as the eye could
reach. It was, however, well situated upon
a plateau midway between the York and
James rivers, and was swept by breezes
<pb n="7"/><anchor id="Pg7"/>which tempered the heat of the summer sun
and kept the town free from mosquitoes.
</p>

<p>
Williamsburg was also well laid out, and
it has the honor of having served as a model
for the city of Washington. It consisted
chiefly of a single street, one hundred feet
broad and three quarters of a mile long,
with the capitol at one end, the college at
the other, and a ten-acre square with public
buildings in the middle. Here in his palace
lived the colonial governor. The town also
contained <q>ten or twelve gentlemen’s families,
besides merchants and tradesmen.</q>
These were the permanent inhabitants;
and during the <q>season</q>—the midwinter
months—the planters’ families came to
town in their coaches, the gentlemen on
horseback, and the little capital was then a
scene of gayety and dissipation.
</p>

<p>
Such was Williamsburg in 1760 when
Thomas Jefferson, the frontier planter’s son,
rode slowly into town at the close of an early
spring day, surveying with the outward indifference,
but keen inward curiosity of a
countryman, the place which was to be his
<pb n="8"/><anchor id="Pg8"/>residence for seven years,—in one sense the
most important, because the most formative,
period of his life. He was a tall stripling,
rather slightly built,—after the model of
the Randolphs,—but extremely well-knit,
muscular, and agile. His face was freckled,
and his features were somewhat pointed. His
hair is variously described as red, reddish,
and sandy, and the color of his eyes as blue,
gray, and also hazel. The expression of his
face was frank, cheerful, and engaging. He
was not handsome in youth, but <q>a very
good-looking man in middle age, and quite a
handsome old man.</q> At maturity he stood
six feet two and a half inches. <q>Mr. Jefferson,</q>
said Mr. Bacon, at one time the
superintendent of his estate, <q>was well proportioned
and straight as a gun-barrel. He
was like a fine horse, he had no surplus flesh.
He had an iron constitution, and was very
strong.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson was always the most cheerful and
optimistic of men. He once said, after remarking
that something must depend <q>on
the chapter of events:</q> <q>I am in the habit
<pb n="9"/><anchor id="Pg9"/>of turning over the next leaf with hope, and,
though it often fails me, there is still another
and another behind.</q> No doubt this
sanguine trait was due in part at least to
his almost perfect health. He was, to use
his own language, <q>blessed with organs of
digestion which accepted and concocted,
without ever murmuring, whatever the palate
chose to consign to them.</q> His habits
through life were good. He never smoked,
he drank wine in moderation, he went to
bed early, he was regular in taking exercise,
either by walking or, more commonly, by
riding on horseback.
</p>

<p>
The college of William and Mary in Jefferson’s
day is described by Mr. Parton as
<q>a medley of college, Indian mission, and
grammar school, ill-governed, and distracted
by dissensions among its ruling powers.</q>
But Jefferson had a thirst for knowledge
and a capacity for acquiring it, which made
him almost independent of institutions of
learning. Moreover, there was one professor
who had a large share in the formation
of his mind. <q>It was my great good for<pb n="10"/><anchor id="Pg10"/>tune,</q> he wrote in his brief autobiography,
<q>and what probably fixed the destinies of
my life, that Dr. William Small, of Scotland,
was then professor of mathematics; a man
profound in most of the useful branches of
science, with a happy talent of communication
and an enlarged liberal mind. He, most
happily for me, soon became attached to me,
and made me his daily companion when not
engaged in the school; and from his conversation
I got my first views of the expansion
of science, and of the system of things in
which we are placed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson, like all well-bred Virginians,
was brought up as an Episcopalian; but as
a young man, perhaps owing in part to the
influence of Dr. Small, he ceased to believe
in Christianity as a religion, though he always
at home attended the Episcopal church, and
though his daughters were brought up in that
faith. If any theological term is to be applied
to him, he should be called a Deist.
Upon the subject of his religious faith,
Jefferson was always extremely reticent.
To one or two friends only did he disclose
<pb n="11"/><anchor id="Pg11"/>his creed, and that was in letters which were
published after his death. When asked,
even by one of his own family, for his opinion
upon any religious matter, he invariably
refused to express it, saying that every person
was bound to look into the subject for
himself, and to decide upon it conscientiously,
unbiased by the opinions of others.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Small introduced Jefferson to other
valuable acquaintances; and, boy though he
was, he soon became the fourth in a group
of friends which embraced the three most
notable men in the little metropolis. These
were, beside Dr. Small, Francis Fauquier,
the acting governor of the province, appointed
by the crown, and George Wythe.
Fauquier was a courtly, honorable, highly
cultivated man of the world, a disciple of
Voltaire, and a confirmed gambler, who had
in this respect an unfortunate influence upon
the Virginia gentry,—not, however, upon
Jefferson, who, though a lover of horses,
and a frequenter of races, never in his life
gambled or even played cards. Wythe was
then just beginning a long and honorable
<pb n="12"/><anchor id="Pg12"/>career as lawyer, statesman, professor, and
judge. He remained always a firm and intimate
friend of Jefferson, who spoke of him,
after his death, as <q>my second father.</q> It
is an interesting fact that Thomas Jefferson,
John Marshall, and Henry Clay were all,
in succession, law students in the office of
George Wythe.
</p>

<p>
Many of the government officials and
planters who flocked to Williamsburg in
the winter were related to Jefferson on his
mother’s side, and they opened their houses
to him with Virginia hospitality. We read
also of dances in the <q>Apollo,</q> the ball-room
of the old Raleigh tavern, and of musical
parties at Gov. Fauquier’s house, in which
Jefferson, who was a skillful and enthusiastic
fiddler, always took part. <q>I suppose,</q> he
remarked in his old age, <q>that during at
least a dozen years of my life, I played no
less than three hours a day.</q>
</p>

<p>
At this period he was somewhat of a
dandy, very particular about his clothes and
equipage, and devoted, as indeed he remained
through life, to fine horses. Virginia im<pb n="13"/><anchor id="Pg13"/>ported more thoroughbred horses than any
other colony, and to this day there is probably
a greater admixture of thoroughbred
blood there than in any other State. Diomed,
winner of the first English Derby,
was brought over to Virginia in 1799, and
founded a family which, even now, is highly
esteemed as a source of speed and endurance.
Jefferson had some of his colts; and both
for the saddle and for his carriage he always
used high-bred horses.
</p>

<p>
Referring to the Williamsburg period of
his life, he wrote once to a grandson: <q>When
I recollect the various sorts of bad company
with which I associated from time to time, I
am astonished I did not turn off with some of
them, and become as worthless to society as
they were.... But I had the good fortune
to become acquainted very early with some
characters of very high standing, and to feel
the incessant wish that I could ever become
what they were. Under temptations and difficulties,
I would ask myself what would Dr.
Small, Mr. Wythe, Peyton Randolph do in
this situation? What course in it will as<pb n="14"/><anchor id="Pg14"/>sure me their approbation? I am certain
that this mode of deciding on my conduct
tended more to correctness than any reasoning
powers that I possesed.</q>
</p>

<p>
This passage throws a light upon Jefferson’s
character. It does not seem to occur to
him that a young man might require some
stronger motive to keep his passions in check
than could be furnished either by the wish
to imitate a good example or by his <q>reasoning
powers.</q> To Jefferson’s well-regulated
mind the desire for approbation was a
sufficient motive. He was particularly sensitive,
perhaps morbidly so, to disapprobation.
The respect, the good-will, the affection
of his countrymen were so dear to him
that the desire to retain them exercised a
great, it may be at times, an undue influence
upon him. <q>I find,</q> he once said, <q>the pain
of a little censure, even when it is unfounded,
is more acute than the pleasure of much
praise.</q>
</p>

<p>
During his second year at college, Jefferson
laid aside all frivolities. He sent home
his horses, contenting himself with a mile
<pb n="15"/><anchor id="Pg15"/>run out and back at nightfall for exercise,
and studying, if we may believe the biographer,
no less than fifteen hours a day. This
intense application reduced the time of his
college course by one half; and after the
second winter at Williamsburg he went home
with a degree in his pocket, and a volume of
Coke upon Lytleton in his trunk.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="16"/><anchor id="Pg16"/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. Virginia in Jefferson's day"/><index index="pdf" level1="II. Virginia in Jefferson's day"/>
<head>II</head>

<head type="sub">VIRGINIA IN JEFFERSON’S DAY</head>

<p>
To a young Virginian of Jefferson’s standing
but two active careers were open, law and
politics, and in almost every case these two,
sooner or later, merged in one. The condition
of Virginia was very different from that
of New England,—neither the clerical nor
the medical profession was held in esteem.
There were no manufactures, and there was
no general commerce.
</p>

<p>
Nature has divided Virginia into two parts:
the mountainous region to the west and the
broad level plain between the mountains and
the sea, intersected by numerous rivers, in
which, far back from the ocean, the tide
ebbs and flows. In this tide-water region
were situated the tobacco plantations which
constituted the wealth and were inhabited by
the aristocracy of the colony. Almost every
planter lived near a river and had his own
<pb n="17"/><anchor id="Pg17"/>wharf, whence a schooner carried his tobacco
to London, and brought back wines, silks,
velvets, guns, saddles, and shoes.
</p>

<p>
The small proprietors of land were comparatively
few in number, and the whole
constitution of the colony, political and social,
was aristocratic. Both real estate and
slaves descended by force of law to the eldest
son, so that the great properties were kept
intact. There were no townships and no
town meetings. The political unit was the
parish; for the Episcopal church was the established
church,—a state institution; and
the parishes were of great extent, there being,
as a rule, but one or two parishes in a county.
</p>

<p>
The clergy, though belonging to an establishment,
were poorly paid, and not revered as
a class. They held the same position of inferiority
in respect to the rich planters which
the clergy of England held in respect to the
country gentry at the same period. Being
appointed by the crown, they were selected
without much regard to fitness, and they
were demoralized by want of supervision,
for there were no resident bishops, and,
<pb n="18"/><anchor id="Pg18"/>further, by the uncertain character of their
incomes, which, being paid in tobacco, were
subject to great fluctuations. A few were
men of learning and virtue who performed
their duties faithfully, and eked out their
incomes by taking pupils. <q>It was these
few,</q> remarks Mr. Parton, <q>who saved civilization
in the colony.</q> A few others became
cultivators of tobacco, and acquired
wealth. But the greater part of the clergy
were companions and hangers-on of the rich
planters,—examples of that type which
Thackeray so well describes in the character
of Parson Sampson in <q>The Virginians.</q>
Strange tales were told of these old Virginia
parsons. One is spoken of as pocketing
annually a hundred dollars, the revenue of a
legacy for preaching four sermons a year
against atheism, gambling, racing, and swearing,—for
all of which vices, except the first,
he was notorious.
</p>

<p>
This period, the middle half of the eighteenth
century, was, as the reader need not
be reminded, that in which the English
church sank to its lowest point. It was the
<pb n="19"/><anchor id="Pg19"/>era when the typical country parson was a
convivial fox-hunter; when the Fellows of
colleges sat over their wine from four o’clock,
their dinner hour, till midnight or after;
when the highest type of bishop was a
learned man who spent more time in his
private studies than in the duties of his
office; when the cathedrals were neglected
and dirty, and the parish churches were
closed from Sunday to Sunday. In England,
the reaction produced Methodism, and,
later, the Tractarian movement; and we are
told that even in Virginia, <q>swarms of Methodists,
Moravians, and New-Light Presbyterians
came over the border from Pennsylvania,
and pervaded the colony.</q>
</p>

<p>
Taxation pressed with very unequal force
upon the poor, and the right of voting was
confined to freeholders. There was no system
of public schools, and the great mass
of the people were ignorant and coarse, but
morally and physically sound,—a good substructure
for an aristocratic society. Wealth
being concentrated mainly in the hands of a
few, Virginia presented striking contrasts of
<pb n="20"/><anchor id="Pg20"/>luxury and destitution, whereas in the neighboring
colony of Pennsylvania, where wealth
was more distributed and society more democratic,
thrift and prosperity were far more
common.
</p>

<p>
<q>In Pennsylvania,</q> relates a foreign traveler,
<q>one sees great numbers of wagons
drawn by four or more fine fat horses....
In the slave States we sometimes meet a
ragged black boy or girl driving a team consisting
of a lean cow and a mule; and I have
seen a mule, a bull, and a cow, each miserable
in its appearance, composing one team, with
a half-naked black slave or two riding or
driving as occasion suited.</q> And yet between
Richmond and Fredericksburg, <q>in
the afternoon, as our road lay through the
woods, I was surprised to meet a family
party traveling along in as elegant a coach
as is usually met with in the neighborhood
of London, and attended by several gayly
dressed footmen.</q>
</p>

<p>
Virginia society just before the Revolution
perfectly illustrated Buckle’s remark about
leisure: <q>Without leisure, science is impos<pb n="21"/><anchor id="Pg21"/>sible; and when leisure has been won, most
of the class possessing it will waste it in the
pursuit of pleasure, and a <hi rend="italic">few</hi> will employ
it in the pursuit of knowledge.</q> Men like
Jefferson, George Wythe, and Madison used
their leisure for the good of their fellow-beings
and for the cultivation of their minds;
whereas the greater part of the planters—and
the poor whites imitated them—spent
their ample leisure in sports, in drinking, and
in absolute idleness. <q>In spite of the Virginians’
love for dissipation,</q> wrote a famous
French traveler, <q>the taste for reading is
commoner among men of the first rank than
in any other part of America; but the populace
is perhaps more ignorant there than
elsewhere.</q> <q>The Virginia virtues,</q> says
Mr. Henry Adams, <q>were those of the field
and farm—the simple and straightforward
mind, the notions of courage and truth, the
absence of mercantile sharpness and quickness,
the rusticity and open-handed hospitality.</q>
Virginians of the upper class were
remarkable for their high-bred courtesy,—a
trait so inherent that it rarely disappeared
<pb n="22"/><anchor id="Pg22"/>even in the bitterness of political disputes
and divisions. This, too, was the natural
product of a society based not on trade or
commerce, but on land. <q>I blush for my
own people,</q> wrote Dr. Channing, from Virginia,
in 1791, <q>when I compare the selfish
prudence of a Yankee with the generous confidence
of a Virginian. Here I find great
vices, but greater virtues than I left behind
me.</q> There was a largeness of temper and
of feeling in the Virginia aristocracy, which
seems to be inseparable from people living
in a new country, upon the outskirts of civilization.
They had the pride of birth, but
they recognized other claims to consideration,
and were as far as possible from estimating
a man according to the amount of
his wealth.
</p>

<p>
Slavery itself was probably a factor for
good in the character of such a man as Jefferson,—it
afforded a daily exercise in the
virtues of benevolence and self-control. How
he treated the blacks may be gathered from
a story, told by his superintendent, of a slave
named Jim who had been caught stealing
<pb n="23"/><anchor id="Pg23"/>nails from the nail-factory: <q>When Mr.
Jefferson came, I sent for Jim, and I never
saw any person, white or black, feel as badly
as he did when he saw his master. The tears
streamed down his face, and he begged for
pardon over and over again. I felt very
badly myself. Mr. Jefferson turned to me
and said, <q>Ah, sir, we can’t punish him. He
has suffered enough already.</q> He then talked
to him, gave him a heap of good advice, and
sent him to the shop.... Jim said: <q>Well
I’se been a-seeking religion a long time, but
I never heard anything before that sounded
so, or made me feel so, as I did when Master
said, <q>Go, and don’t do so any more,</q> and
now I’se determined to seek religion till I
find it;</q> and sure enough he afterwards
came to me for a permit to go and be baptized....
He was always a good servant
afterward.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another element that contributed to the
efficiency and the high standard of the early
Virginia statesman was a good, old-fashioned
classical education. They were familiar, to
use Matthew Arnold’s famous expression,
<pb n="24"/><anchor id="Pg24"/><q>with the best that has ever been said or
done.</q> This was no small advantage to men
who were called upon to act as founders of
a republic different indeed from the republics
of Greece and Rome, but still based upon
the same principles, and demanding an
exercise of the same heroic virtues. The
American Revolution would never have cut
quite the figure in the world which history
assigns to it, had it not been conducted with
a kind of classic dignity and decency; and
to this result nobody contributed more than
Jefferson.
</p>

<p>
Such was Virginia in the eighteenth century,—at
the base of society, the slaves;
next, a lower class, rough, ignorant, and
somewhat brutal, but still wholesome, and
possessing the primitive virtues of courage
and truth; and at the top, the landed gentry,
luxurious, proud, idle and dissipated
for the most part, and yet blossoming into
a few characters of a type so high that the
world has hardly seen a better. Had he
been born in Europe, Jefferson would doubtless
have devoted himself to music, or to
<pb n="25"/><anchor id="Pg25"/>architecture, or to literature, or to science,—for
in all these directions his taste was
nearly equally strong; but these careers being
closed to him by the circumstances of
the colony, he became a lawyer, and then,
under pressure of the Revolution, a politician
and statesman.
</p>

<p>
During the four years following his graduation,
Jefferson spent most of the winter
months at Williamsburg, pursuing his legal
and other studies, and the rest of the year
upon the family plantation, the management
of which had devolved upon him. Now, as
always, he was the most industrious of men.
He lived, as Mr. Parton remarks, <q>with a
pen in his hand.</q> He kept a garden book,
a farm book, a weather book, a receipt book,
a cash book, and, while he practiced law, a
fee book. Many of these books are still preserved,
and the entries are as legible now as
when they were first written down in Jefferson’s
small but clear and graceful hand,—the
hand of an artist. Jefferson, as one of
his old friends once remarked, <hi rend="italic">hated</hi> superficial
knowledge; and he dug to the roots of
<pb n="26"/><anchor id="Pg26"/>the common law, reading deeply in old reports
written in law French and law Latin,
and especially studying Magna Charta and
Bracton.
</p>

<p>
He found time also for riding, for music,
and dancing; and in his twentieth year he
became enamored of Miss Rebecca Burwell,
a Williamsburg belle more distinguished,
tradition reports, for beauty than for cleverness.
But Jefferson was not yet in a position
to marry,—he even contemplated a
foreign tour; and the girl, somewhat abruptly,
married another lover. The wound
seems not to have been a deep one. Jefferson,
in fact, though he found his chief happiness
in family affection, and though capable
of strong and lasting attachments, was not
the man for a romantic passion. He was a
philosopher of the reasonable, eighteenth-century
type. No one was more kind and
just in the treatment of his slaves, but he
did not free them, as George Wythe, perhaps
foolishly, did; and he was even cautious
about promulgating his views as to the folly
and wickedness of slavery, though he did his
<pb n="27"/><anchor id="Pg27"/>best to promote its abolition by legislative
measures. There was not in Jefferson the
material for a martyr or a Don Quixote;
but that was Nature’s fault, not his. It may
be said of every particular man that there
is a certain depth to which he cannot sink,
and there is a certain height to which he
cannot rise. Within the intermediate zone
there is ample exercise for free-will; and no
man struggled harder than Jefferson to fulfill
all the obligations which, as he conceived,
were laid upon him.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="28"/><anchor id="Pg28"/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. Monticello and its Household"/><index index="pdf" level1="III. Monticello and its Household"/>
<head>III</head>

<head type="sub">MONTICELLO AND ITS HOUSEHOLD</head>

<p>
In April, 1764, Jefferson came of age,
and his first public act was a characteristic
one. For the benefit of the neighborhood,
he procured the passage of a statute to authorize
the dredging of the Rivanna River
upon which his own estate bordered in part.
He then by private subscriptions raised a
sum sufficient for carrying out this purpose;
and in a short time the stream, upon which
before a bark canoe would hardly have
floated, was made available for the transportation
of farm produce to the James River,
and thence to the sea.
</p>

<p>
In 1766, he made a journey to Philadelphia,
in order to be inoculated for smallpox,
traveling in a light gig drawn by a high-spirited
horse, and narrowly escaping death
by drowning in one of the numerous rivers
which had to be forded between Charlottes<pb n="29"/><anchor id="Pg29"/>ville and Philadelphia. In the following
year, about the time of his twenty-fourth
birthday, he was admitted to the bar, and
entered almost immediately upon a large
and lucrative practice. He remained at the
bar only seven years, but during most of
this time his professional income averaged
more than £2500 a year; and he increased
his paternal estate from 1900 acres to 5000
acres. He argued with force and fluency,
but his voice was not suitable for public
speaking, and soon became husky. Moreover,
Jefferson had an intense repugnance
to the arena. He shrank with a kind of
nervous horror from a personal contest, and
hated to be drawn into a discussion. The
turmoil and confusion of a public body were
hideous to him;—it was as a writer, not as
a speaker, that he won fame, first in the
Virginia Assembly, and afterward in the
Continental Congress.
</p>

<p>
In October, 1768, Jefferson was chosen
to represent Albemarle County in the House
of Burgesses of Virginia; and thus began
his long political career of forty years. A
<pb n="30"/><anchor id="Pg30"/>resolution which he formed at the outset is
stated in the following letter written in 1792
to a friend who had offered him a share in
an undertaking which promised to be profitable:—
</p>

<p>
<q>When I first entered on the stage of
public life (now twenty-four years ago) I
came to a resolution never to engage, while
in public office, in any kind of enterprise for
the improvement of my fortune, nor to wear
any other character than that of a farmer.
I have never departed from it in a single
instance; and I have in multiplied instances
found myself happy in being able to decide
and to act as a public servant, clear of all
interest, in the multiform questions that
have arisen, wherein I have seen others embarrassed
and biased by having got themselves
in a more interested situation.</q>
</p>

<p>
During the next few years there was a
lull in political affairs,—a sullen calm before
the storm of the Revolution; but they
were important years in Mr. Jefferson’s life.
In February, 1770, the house at Shadwell,
where he lived with his mother and sisters,
<pb n="31"/><anchor id="Pg31"/>was burned to the ground, while the family
were away. <q>Were none of my books
saved?</q> Jefferson asked of the negro who
came to him, breathless, with news of the
disaster. <q>No, master,</q> was the reply,
<q>but we saved the fiddle.</q>
</p>

<p>
In giving his friend Page an account of
the fire, Jefferson wrote: <q>On a reasonable
estimate, I calculate the cost of the books
burned to have been £200. Would to God
it had been the money,—then had it never
cost me a sigh!</q> Beside the books, Jefferson
lost most of his notes and papers; but
no mishap, not caused by his own fault, ever
troubled his peace of mind.
</p>

<p>
After the fire, his mother and the children
took temporary refuge in the home of an
overseer, and Jefferson repaired to Monticello,—as
he had named the elevated spot
on the paternal estate where he had already
begun to build the house which was his
home for the remainder of his life.
</p>

<p>
Monticello is a small outlying peak, upon
the outskirts of the mountainous part of
Virginia, west of the tide-water region, and
<pb n="32"/><anchor id="Pg32"/>rising 580 feet above the plain at its foot.
Upon its summit there is a space of about
six acres, leveled partly by nature and partly
by art; and here, one hundred feet back
from the brow of the hill, Jefferson built his
house. It is a long, low building,—still
standing,—with a Grecian portico in front,
surmounted by a cupola. The road by
which it is approached winds round and
round, so as to make the ascent less difficult.
In front of the house three long terraces,
terminating in small pavilions, were
constructed; and upon the northern terrace,
or in its pavilion, Jefferson and his friends
used to sit on summer nights gazing off
toward the Blue Ridge, some eighty miles
distant, or upon the nearer peaks of the Ragged
Mountains. The altitude is such that
neither dew nor mosquitoes can reach it.
</p>

<p>
To this beautiful but as yet uncompleted
mountain home, Jefferson, in January, 1772,
brought his bride. She was Martha Skelton,
who had been left a widow at nineteen,
and was now twenty-two, a daughter of John
Wayles, a leading and opulent lawyer.
<pb n="33"/><anchor id="Pg33"/>Martha Skelton was a tall, beautiful, highly
educated young woman, of graceful carriage,
with hazel eyes, literary in her tastes, a
skillful performer upon the spinnet, and a
notable housewife whose neatly kept account
books are still preserved. They were married
at <q>The Forest,</q> her father’s estate in
Charles City County, and immediately set
out for Monticello.
</p>

<p>
Two years later, in 1774, died Dabney
Carr, a brilliant and patriotic young lawyer,
Jefferson’s most intimate friend, and the
husband of his sister Martha. Dabney
Carr left six small children, whom, with
their mother, Jefferson took under his wing,
and they were brought up at Monticello as
if they had been his own children. Jefferson
loved children, and he had, in common
with that very different character, Aaron
Burr, an instinct for teaching. While still
a young man himself, he was often called
upon to direct the studies of other young
men,—Madison and Monroe were in this
sense his pupils; and the founding of the
University of Virginia was an achievement
<pb n="34"/><anchor id="Pg34"/>long anticipated by him and enthusiastically
performed.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson was somewhat unfortunate in his
own children, for, of the six that were born
to him, only two, Martha and Maria, lived
to grow up. Maria married but died young,
leaving one child. Martha, the first-born,
was a brilliant, cheerful, wholesome woman.
She married Thomas Mann Randolph, afterward
governor of Virginia. <q>She was just
like her father, in this respect,</q> says Mr.
Bacon, the superintendent,—<q>she was always
busy. If she wasn’t reading or writing,
she was always doing something. She
used to sit in Mr. Jefferson’s room a great
deal, and sew, or read, or talk, as he would
be busy about something else.</q> John Randolph
of Roanoke once toasted her—and it
was after his quarrel with her father—as
the sweetest woman in Virginia. She left
ten children, and many of her descendants
are still living.
</p>

<p>
To her, and to his other daughter, Maria,
who is described as being more beautiful
and no less amiable than her sister, but not
<pb n="35"/><anchor id="Pg35"/>so intellectual, Jefferson owed the chief happiness
of his life. Like many another man
who has won fame and a high position in the
world, he counted these things but as dust
and ashes in comparison with family affection.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="36"/><anchor id="Pg36"/>
<index index="toc" level1="IV. Jefferson in the Revolution"/><index index="pdf" level1="IV. Jefferson in the Revolution"/>
<head>IV</head>

<head type="sub">JEFFERSON IN THE REVOLUTION</head>

<p>
Shortly after Mr. Jefferson’s marriage,
the preliminary movements of the Revolution
began, and though he took an active
part in them it was not without reluctance.
Even after the battle of Bunker Hill, namely,
in November, 1775, he wrote to a kinsman
that there was not a man in the British
Empire who more cordially loved a union
with Great Britain than he did. John Jay
said after the Revolution: <q>During the
course of my life, and until the second petition
of Congress in 1775, I never did hear
any American of any class or description
express a wish for the independence of the
colonies.</q>
</p>

<p>
But these friendly feelings were first outraged
and then extinguished by a long series
of ill-considered and oppressive acts, covering,
with some intermissions, a period of
<pb n="37"/><anchor id="Pg37"/>about twelve years. Of these the most noteworthy
were the Stamp Act, which amounted
to taxation without representation, and the
impost on tea, which was coupled with a
provision that the receipts should be applied
to the salaries of officers of the crown, thus
placing them beyond the control of the local
assemblies. The crown officers were also
authorized to grant salaries and pensions at
their discretion; and a board of revenue
commissioners for the whole country was established
at Boston, and armed with despotic
powers. These proceedings amounted to a
deprivation of liberty, and they were aggravated
by the king’s contemptuous rejection
of the petitions addressed to him by the
colonists. We know what followed,—the
burning of the British war schooner, Gaspee,
by leading citizens of Providence, and the
famous tea-party in Boston harbor.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Virginia had not been inactive.
In March, 1772, a few young men, members
of the House of Burgesses, met at the Raleigh
Tavern in Williamsburg. They were
Patrick Henry, Richard Henry Lee and his
<pb n="38"/><anchor id="Pg38"/>brother, Thomas Jefferson, and a few others.
They drew up several resolutions, the most
important of which called for the appointment
of a standing committee and for an
invitation to the other colonies to appoint
like committees for mutual information and
assistance in the struggle against the crown.
A similar resolution had been adopted in
Massachusetts two years before, but without
any practical result. The Virginia resolution
was passed the next day by the House
of Burgesses, and it gave rise to those proceedings
which ushered in the Revolution.
</p>

<p>
The first Continental Congress was to meet
in Philadelphia, in September, 1774; and
Jefferson, in anticipation, prepared a draft
of instructions for the delegates who were to
be elected by Virginia. Being taken ill
himself, on his way to the convention, he
sent forward a copy of these instructions.
They were considered too drastic to be
adopted by the convention; but some of the
members caused them to be published under
the title of <q>A Summary View of the Rights
of America.</q> The pamphlet was extensively
<pb n="39"/><anchor id="Pg39"/>read in this country, and a copy which had
been sent to London falling into the hands
of Edmund Burke, he had it reprinted in
England, where it ran through edition after
edition. Jefferson’s name thus became
known throughout the colonies and in England.
</p>

<p>
The <q>Summary View</q> is in reality a
political essay. Its author wasted no time
in discussing the specific legal and constitutional
questions which had arisen between
the colonies and the crown; but he went to
the root of the matter, and with one or two
generalizations as bold and original as if
they had been made by Rousseau, he cut the
Gordian knot, and severed America from the
Parliament of Great Britain. He admitted
some sort of dependence upon the crown,
but his two main principles were these: (1)
that the soil of this country belonged to the
people who had settled and improved it, and
that the crown had no right to sell or give it
away; (2) that the right of self-government
was a right natural to every people, and that
Parliament, therefore, had no authority to
<pb n="40"/><anchor id="Pg40"/>make laws for America. Jefferson was
always about a century in advance of his
time; and the <q>Summary View</q> substantially
anticipated what is now the acknowledged
relation of England to her colonies.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson was elected a member of the
Continental Congress at its second session;
and he made a rapid journey to Philadelphia
in a chaise, with two led horses behind,
reaching there the night before Washington
set out for Cambridge. The Congress was
composed mainly of young men. Franklin,
the oldest member, was seventy-one, and a
few others were past sixty. Washington
was forty-three; John Adams, forty; Patrick
Henry, a year or two younger; John Rutledge,
thirty-six; his brother, twenty-six;
John Langdon and William Paca, thirty-five,
John Jay, thirty; Thomas Stone, thirty-two,
and Jefferson, thirty-two.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson soon became intimate with John
Adams, who in later years said of him:
<q>Though a silent member of Congress, he
was so prompt, frank, explicit, and decisive
upon committees and in conversation—not
<pb n="41"/><anchor id="Pg41"/>even Samuel Adams was more so—that he
soon seized upon my heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson, as we have seen, was not fitted
to shine as an orator, still less in debate.
But as a writer he had that capacity for style
which comes, if it comes at all, as a gift of
nature; which needs to be supplemented, but
which cannot be supplied, by practice and
study. In some of his early letters there
are slight reminders of Dr. Johnson’s manner,
and still more of Sterne’s. Sterne indeed
was one of his favorite authors. However,
these early traces of imitation were
absorbed very quickly; and, before he was
thirty, Jefferson became master of a clear,
smooth, polished, picturesque, and individual
style. To him, therefore, his associates naturally
turned when they needed such a proclamation
to the world as the Declaration of
Independence; and that document is very
characteristic of its author. It was imagination
that gave distinction to Jefferson both
as a man and as a writer. He never dashed
off a letter which did not contain some play
of fancy; and whether he was inventing a
<pb n="42"/><anchor id="Pg42"/>plough or forecasting the destinies of a great
Democracy, imagination qualified the performance.
</p>

<p>
One of the most effective forms in which
imagination displays itself in prose is by the
use of a common word in such a manner and
context that it conveys an uncommon meaning.
There are many examples of this rhetorical
art in Jefferson’s writings, but the
most notable one occurs in the noble first
paragraph of the Declaration of Independence:
<q>When, in the course of human
events, it becomes necessary for one people
to dissolve the political bands which have
connected them with another, and to assume
among the powers of the earth the separate
and equal station to which the Laws of
Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a
decent respect to the opinions of mankind
requires that they should declare the causes
which impel them to the separation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Upon this paragraph Mr. Parton eloquently
observes: <q>The noblest utterance of
the whole composition is the reason given
for making the Declaration,—<q><hi rend="italic">A decent
<pb n="43"/><anchor id="Pg43"/>respect for the opinions of mankind</hi>.</q> This
touches the heart. Among the best emotions
that human nature knows is the veneration
of man for man. This recognition of the
public opinion of the world—the sum of human
sense—as the final arbiter in all such
controversies is the single phrase of the document
which Jefferson alone, perhaps, of all
the Congress, could have originated; and in
point of merit it was worth all the rest.</q>
</p>

<p>
Franklin and John Adams, who were on
the committee with Jefferson, made a few
verbal changes in his draught of the Declaration,
and it was then discussed and reviewed
by Congress for three days. Congress
made eighteen suppressions, six additions,
and ten alterations; and it must be admitted
that most of these were improvements. For
example, Jefferson had framed a paragraph
in which the king was severely censured for
opposing certain measures looking to the suppression
of the slave trade. This would have
come with an ill grace from the Americans,
since for a century New England had been
enriching herself by that trade, and the southern
colonies had subsisted upon the labor
<pb n="44"/><anchor id="Pg44"/>which it brought them. Congress wisely
struck out the paragraph.
</p>

<p>
The Declaration of Independence was received
with rapture throughout the country.
Everywhere it was read aloud to the people
who gathered to hear it, amid the booming
of guns, the ringing of bells, and the display
of fireworks. In Philadelphia, after the reading,
the late king’s coat of arms was burned
in Independence Square; in New York the
leaden statue, in Bowling Green, of George
III. was <q>laid prostrate in the dust,</q> and
ordered to be run into bullets. Virginia had
already stricken the king’s name from her
prayer-book; and Rhode Island now forbade
her people to pray for the king, as king,
under a penalty of one hundred thousand
pounds! The Declaration of Independence,
both as a political and literary document, has
stood the test of time. It has all the classic
qualities of an oration by Demosthenes; and
even that passage in it which has been criticised—that,
namely, which pronounces all
men to be created equal—is true in a sense,
the truth of which it will take a century or
two yet to develop.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="45"/><anchor id="Pg45"/>
<index index="toc" level1="V. Reform Work in Virginia"/><index index="pdf" level1="V. Reform Work in Virginia"/>
<head>V</head>

<head type="sub">REFORM WORK IN VIRGINIA</head>

<p>
In September, 1776, Jefferson, having
resigned his seat in Congress to engage in
duties nearer home, returned to Monticello.
A few weeks later, a messenger from Congress
arrived to inform him that he had
been elected a joint commissioner with Dr.
Franklin and Silas Deane to represent at
Paris the newly formed nation. His heart
had long been set upon foreign travel; but
he felt obliged to decline this appointment,
first on account of the ill health of his wife,
and secondly, because he was needed in Virginia
as a legislator. Not since Lycurgus
gave laws to the Spartans had there been
such an opportunity as then existed in the
United States. John Adams declared:
<q>The best lawgivers of antiquity would rejoice
to live at a period like this when, for
the first time in the history of the world,
<pb n="46"/><anchor id="Pg46"/>three millions of people are deliberately
<hi rend="italic">choosing</hi> their government and institutions.</q>
</p>

<p>
Of all the colonies, Virginia offered the
best field for reform, because, as we have
already seen, she had by far the most aristocratic
political and social system; and it is
extraordinary how quickly the reform was
effected by Jefferson and his friends. In
ordinary times of peace the task would have
been impossible; but in throwing off the
English yoke, the colonists had opened their
minds to new ideas; change had become
familiar to them, and in the general upheaval
the rights of the people were recognized. A
year later, Jefferson wrote to Franklin:
<q>With respect to the State of Virginia, in
particular, the people seem to have laid
aside the monarchical and taken up the
republican government with as much ease
as would have attended their throwing off
an old and putting on a new set of clothes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s greatness lay in this, that he
was the first statesman who trusted the mass
of the people. He alone had divined the
fact that they were competent, morally and
<pb n="47"/><anchor id="Pg47"/>mentally, for self-government. It is almost
impossible for us to appreciate Jefferson’s
originality in this respect, because the bold
and untried theories for which he contended
are now regarded as commonplace maxims.
He may have derived his political ideas in
part from the French philosophical writers
of the eighteenth century, although there is
no evidence to that effect; but he was certainly
the first statesman to grasp the idea
of democracy as a form of government, just
as, at a later day, Walt Whitman was the
first poet to grasp the idea of equality as a
social system. Hamilton, John Adams,
Pinckney, Gouverneur Morris, even Washington
himself, all believed that popular
government would be unsafe and revolutionary
unless held in check by a strong
executive and by an aristocratic senate.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson in his lifetime was often charged
with gross inconsistency in his political
views and conduct; but the inconsistency
was more apparent than real. At times he
strictly construed, and at times he almost
set aside the Constitution; but the clue to
<pb n="48"/><anchor id="Pg48"/>his conduct can usually be found in the
fundamental principle that the only proper
function of government or constitutions is to
express the will of the people, and that the
people are morally and mentally competent to
govern. <q>I am sure,</q> he wrote in 1796, <q>that
the mass of citizens in these United States
mean well, and I firmly believe that they
will always act well, whenever they can obtain
a right understanding of matters.</q> And
Jefferson’s lifelong endeavor was to enable
the people to form this <q>right understanding</q>
by educating them. His ideas of the
scope of public education went far beyond
those which prevailed in his time, and considerably
beyond those which prevail even
now. For example, a free university course
for the most apt pupils graduated at the
grammar schools made part of his scheme,—an
idea most nearly realized in the Western
States; and those States received their
impetus in educational matters from the Ordinance
of 1787, which was largely the product
of Jefferson’s foresight.
</p>

<p>
Happily for Virginia, she did not become
<pb n="49"/><anchor id="Pg49"/>a scene of war until the year 1779, and,
meanwhile, Jefferson and his friends lost no
time in remodeling her constitution. There
were no common schools, and the mass of
the people were more ignorant and rough
than their contemporaries in any other
colony. Elections were scenes of bribery,
intimidation, and riot, surpassing even those
which Hogarth depicted in England. Elkanah
Watson, of Massachusetts, describes
what he saw at Hanover Court House, Patrick
Henry’s county, in 1778: <q>The whole
county was assembled. The moment I
alighted, a wretched, pug-nosed fellow assailed
me to swap watches. I had hardly
shaken him off, when I was attacked by a
wild Irishman who insisted on my swapping
horses with him.... With him I
came near being involved in a boxing-match,
the Irishman swearing, I <q>did not
trate him like a jintleman.</q> I had hardly
escaped this dilemma when my attention
was attracted by a fight between two very
unwieldy fat men, foaming and puffing like
two furies, until one succeeded in twisting
<pb n="50"/><anchor id="Pg50"/>a forefinger in a sidelock of the other’s
hair, and in the act of thrusting by this
purchase his thumb into the latter’s eye, he
bawled out, <q>King’s Cruise,</q> equivalent in
technical language to <q>Enough.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Quakers were put in the pillory, scolding
women were ducked, and it is said that a
woman was burned to death in Princess
Anne County for witchcraft. The English
church, as we have seen, was an established
church; and all taxpayers, dissenters as
well as churchmen, were compelled to contribute
to its support. Baptist preachers
were arrested, and fined as disturbers of
the peace. The law of entail, both as respects
land and slaves, was so strict that
their descent to the eldest son could not be
prevented even by agreement between the
owner and his heir.
</p>

<p>
In his reformation of the laws, Jefferson
was supported by Patrick Henry, now governor,
and inhabiting what was still called
the palace; by George Mason, a patriotic
lawyer who drew the famous Virginia Bill
of Rights; by George Wythe, his old pre<pb n="51"/><anchor id="Pg51"/>ceptor, and by James Madison, Jefferson’s
friend, pupil, and successor, who in this year
began his political career as a member of the
House of Burgesses.
</p>

<p>
Opposed to them were the conservative
party led by R. C. Nicholas, head of the
Virginia bar, a stanch churchman and gentleman
of the old school, and Edward Pendleton,
whom Jefferson described as <q>full
of resource, never vanquished; for if he
lost the main battle he returned upon you,
and regained so much of it as to make it a
drawn one, by dexterous manœuvres, skirmishes
in detail, and the recovery of small
advantages, which, little singly, were important
all together. You never knew when
you were clear of him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Intense as the controversy was, fundamental
as were the points at issue, the speakers
never lost that courtesy for which the Virginians
were remarkable; John Randolph
being perhaps the only exception. Even
Patrick Henry—though from his humble
origin and impetuous oratory one might
have expected otherwise—was never guilty
<pb n="52"/><anchor id="Pg52"/>of any rudeness to his opponents. What
Jefferson said of Madison was true of the
Virginia orators in general,—<q>soothing
always the feelings of his adversaries by
civilities and softnesses of expression.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson struck first at the system of
entail. After a three weeks’ struggle, land
and slaves were put upon the same footing
as all other property,—they might be sold
or bequeathed according to the will of the
possessor. Then came a longer and more
bitter contest. Jefferson was for abolishing
all connection between church and state, and
for establishing complete freedom of religion.
Nine years elapsed before Virginia could be
brought to that point; but at this session
he procured a repeal of the law which imposed
penalties for attendance at a dissenting
meeting-house, and also of the law
compelling dissenters to pay tithes. The
fight was, therefore, substantially won; and
in 1786, Jefferson’s <q>Act for establishing
religion</q> became the law of Virginia.<note place="foot">It is to be remembered that the support of public
worship was compulsory in Massachusetts—the inhabitants of certain cities excepted—down to the year 1833.
An attempt to free the people from this burden, led by
Dr. Childs, of Berkshire County, was defeated at the Constitutional
Convention of 1820.</note>
</p>

<pb n="53"/><anchor id="Pg53"/>

<p>
Another far-reaching law introduced by
Jefferson at this memorable session of 1776
provided for the naturalization of foreigners
in Virginia, after a two years’ residence in
the State, and upon a declaration of their
intention to become American citizens. The
bill provided also that the minor children
of naturalized parents should be citizens of
the United States when they came of age.
The principles of this measure were afterward
embodied in the statutes of the United
States, and they are in force to-day.
</p>

<p>
At this session Jefferson also drew an act
for establishing courts of law in Virginia,
the royal courts having necessarily passed
out of existence when the Declaration of
Independence was adopted. Moreover, he
set on foot a revision of all the statutes of
Virginia, a committee with him at the head
being appointed for this purpose; and
finally he procured the removal of the capital
from Williamsburg to Richmond.
</p>

<pb n="54"/><anchor id="Pg54"/>

<p>
All this was accomplished, mainly by
Jefferson’s efforts; and yet the two bills
upon which he set most store failed entirely.
These were, first, a comprehensive measure
of state education, running up through
primary schools and grammar schools to a
state university, and, secondly, a bill providing
that all who were born in slavery
after the passage of the bill should be free.
</p>

<p>
This was Jefferson’s second ineffectual
attempt to promote the abolition of slavery.
During the year 1768, when he first became
a member of the House of Burgesses, he had
endeavored to procure the passage of a law
enabling slave-owners to free their slaves,
He induced Colonel Bland, one of the ablest,
oldest, and most respected members to propose
the law, and he seconded the proposal;
but it was overwhelmingly rejected. <q>I, as
a younger member,</q> related Jefferson afterward,
<q>was more spared in the debate; but
he was denounced as an enemy to his country,
and was treated with the greatest indecorum.</q>
</p>

<p>
In 1778 Jefferson made another attempt:<pb n="55"/><anchor id="Pg55"/>—he brought in a bill forbidding the further
importation of slaves in Virginia, and this
was passed without opposition. Again, in
1784, when Virginia ceded to the United
States her immense northwestern territory,
Jefferson drew up a scheme of government
for the States to be carved out of it which
included a provision <q>that after the year
1800 of the Christian Era, there shall be
neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in
any of the said States, otherwise than in
punishment of crimes.</q> The provision was
rejected by Congress.
</p>

<p>
In his <q>Notes on Virginia,</q> written in the
year 1781, but published in 1787, he said:
<q>The whole commerce between master and
slave is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous
passions, the most unremitting despotism,
on the one part, and degrading submission
on the other. Our children see this, and
learn to imitate it.... With the morals
of the people their industry also is destroyed.
For in a warm climate no one will labor
for himself who can make another labor for
him.... Indeed, I tremble for my country
<pb n="56"/><anchor id="Pg56"/>when I reflect that God is just; that his
justice cannot sleep forever.... The Almighty
has no attribute which can take sides
with us in such a contest.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the Missouri Compromise question
came up, in 1820, Jefferson rightly predicted
that a controversy had begun which would
end in disruption; but he made the mistake
of supposing that the Northern party were
actuated in that matter solely by political
motives. April 22, 1820, he wrote: <q>This
momentous question, like a fire-bell in the
night, awakened and filled me with terror.
I considered it at once as the knell of the
Union.... A geographical line, coinciding
with a marked principle, moral and political,
once conceived and held up to the angry passions
of men, will never be obliterated; and
every new irritation will mark it deeper and
deeper.... The cession of that kind of property,
for so it is misnamed, is a bagatelle
which would not cost me a second thought
if, in that way, a general emancipation and
expatriation could be effected; and gradually
and with due sacrifices I think it might be.
<pb n="57"/><anchor id="Pg57"/>But as it is, we have the wolf by the ears,
and we can neither hold him nor safely let
him go. Justice is in one scale, and self-preservation
in the other.</q>
</p>

<p>
And later, he wrote of the Missouri Compromise,
as a <q>question having just enough
of the semblance of morality to throw dust
into the eyes of the people.... The Federalists,
unable to rise again under the old
division of Whig and Tory, have invented a
geographical division which gives them fourteen
States against ten, and seduces their old
opponents into a coalition with them. Real
morality is on the other side. For while the
removal of the slaves from one State to
another adds no more to their numbers than
their removal from one country to another,
the spreading them over a larger surface adds
to their happiness, and renders their future
emancipation more practicable.</q>
</p>

<p>
These misconceptions as to Northern motives
might be ascribed to Jefferson’s advanced
age, for, as he himself graphically
expressed it, he then had <q>one foot in the
grave, and the other lifted to follow it;</q> but
<pb n="58"/><anchor id="Pg58"/>it would probably be more just to say that
they were due, in part, to his prejudice against
the New England people and especially the
New England clergy, and in part to the fact
that his long retirement in Virginia had somewhat
contracted his views and sympathies.
Jefferson was a man of intense local attachments,
and he took color from his surroundings.
He never ceased, however, to regard
slavery as morally wrong and socially ruinous;
and in the brief autobiography which he
left behind him he made these predictions:
<q>Nothing is more certainly written in the
book of fate than that these people are to
be free. Nor is it less certain that the two
races, equally free, cannot live in the same
government.</q>
</p>

<p>
History has justified the second as well as
the first of these declarations, for, excepting
that brief period of anarchy known as <q>the
carpet-bag era,</q> it cannot be maintained that
the colored race in the Southern States have
been at any time, even since their emancipation,
<q>equally free,</q> in the sense of politically
free, with their white fellow citizens.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="59"/><anchor id="Pg59"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VI. Governor of Virginia"/><index index="pdf" level1="VI. Governor of Virginia"/>
<head>VI</head>

<head type="sub">GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA</head>

<p>
For three years Jefferson was occupied
with the legislative duties already described,
and especially with a revision of the Virginia
statutes, and then, in June, 1779, he succeeded
Patrick Henry as governor of the
State. It has often been remarked that he
was, all through life, a lucky man, but in
this case fortune did not favor him, for the
ensuing two years proved to be, so far as
Virginia was concerned, by much the worst
period of the war.
</p>

<p>
The French alliance, though no doubt an
ultimate benefit to the colonies, had at first
two bad effects: it relaxed the energy of the
Americans, who trusted that France would
fight their battles for them; and it stimulated
the British to increased exertions. The British
commissioners announced that henceforth
England would employ, in the prosecu<pb n="60"/><anchor id="Pg60"/>tion of the war, all those agencies which
<q>God and nature had placed in her hands.</q>
This meant that the ferocity of the Indians
would be invoked, a matter of special moment
to Virginia, since her western frontier
swarmed with Indians, the bravest of their
race.
</p>

<p>
The colony, it must be remembered, was
then of immense extent; for beside the present
Virginia and West Virginia, Kentucky
and the greater part of Ohio, Indiana, and
Illinois were embraced in it. It stretched,
in short, from the Atlantic Ocean to the
Mississippi River. Upon the seaboard Virginia
was especially vulnerable, the tide-water
region being penetrated by numerous bays
and rivers, which the enemy’s ships could
easily ascend, for they were undefended by
forts or men. The total navy of the colony
was four vessels, mounting sixty-two guns,
and a few armed boats. The flower of the
Virginia soldiery, to the number of ten thousand,
were in Washington’s army, and supplies
of men, of arms, of ammunition and
food were urgently called for by General
<pb n="61"/><anchor id="Pg61"/>Gates, who was battling against Cornwallis
in North Carolina. The militia were supposed
to number fifty thousand, which included
every man between sixteen and fifty
years of age; but this was only one man for
every square mile of territory in the present
State of Virginia, and of these militiamen it
was estimated that, east of the Blue Ridge,
only about one in five was armed with a gun.
The treasury was practically bankrupt, and
there was a dearth of every kind of warlike
material.
</p>

<p>
Such was the situation which confronted,
as Mr. Parton puts it, <q>a lawyer of thirty-six,
with a talent for music, a taste for art,
a love of science, literature, and gardening.</q>
The task was one calling rather for a soldier
than a statesman; but Mr. Jefferson faced it
with courage, and on the whole with success.
In retaliating the cruel measures of the
British, he showed a firmness which must
have been especially difficult for a man of
his temperament. He put in irons and confined
in a dungeon Colonel Henry Hamilton
and two subordinate officers who had com<pb n="62"/><anchor id="Pg62"/>mitted atrocities upon American prisoners.
He caused a prison-ship, like the ships of
infamous memory which were employed as
prisons by the British at New York, to be
prepared; and the exchange of captives between
Virginia and the British was stopped.
<q>Humane conduct on our part,</q> wrote Jefferson,
<q>was found to produce no effect.
The contrary, therefore, is to be tried. Iron
will be retaliated by iron, prison-ships for
prison-ships, and like for like in general.</q>
But in November, 1779, notice was received
that the English, under their new leader, Sir
Henry Clinton, had adopted a less barbarous
system of warfare; and fortunately Jefferson’s
measures of reprisal became unnecessary.
</p>

<p>
Hampered as he was by want of men and
money, Jefferson did all that he could to supply
the needs of the Virginia soldiers with
Washington, of the army in North Carolina,
led by Gates, and of George Rogers Clarke,
the heroic commander who put down the
Indian uprising on the western frontier, and
captured the English officer who instigated
<pb n="63"/><anchor id="Pg63"/>it,—that same Colonel Hamilton of whom
mention has already been made. The story
of Clarke’s adventures in the wilderness,—he
was a neighbor of Jefferson, only twenty-six
years old,—of his forced marches, of
his masterful dealing with the Indians, and
finally of his capture of the British force,
forms a thrilling chapter in the history of the
American Revolution.
</p>

<p>
Many indeed of Jefferson’s constituents
censured him as being over-zealous in his
support of the army of Gates. He stripped
Virginia, they said, of troops and resources
which, as it proved afterward, were needed
at home. But if Cornwallis were not defeated
in North Carolina, it was certain that
he would overrun the much more exposed
Virginia. If he could be defeated anywhere,
it would be in the Carolinas. Jefferson’s
course, it is sufficient to say, was that recommended
by Washington; and his exertions
in behalf of the Continental armies were
commended in the highest terms not only by
Washington, but also by Generals Gates,
Greene, Steuben, and Lafayette. The mili<pb n="64"/><anchor id="Pg64"/>tia were called out, leaving behind only so
many men as were required to cultivate the
land, wagons were impressed, including two
belonging to the governor, and attempts were
even made—extraordinary for Virginia—to
manufacture certain much-needed articles.
<q>Our smiths,</q> wrote Jefferson, <q>are making
five hundred axes and some tomahawks for
General Gates.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus fared the year 1779, and in 1780
things went from bad to worse. In April
came a letter from Madison, saying that
Washington’s army was on the verge of
dissolution, being only half-clothed, and in a
way to be starved. The public treasury was
empty and the public credit gone. In August
occurred the disastrous defeat of General
Gates at Camden, which left Virginia at the
mercy of Cornwallis. In October a British
fleet under Leslie ravaged the country about
Portsmouth, but failing to effect a juncture
with Cornwallis, who was detained in North
Carolina by illness among his troops, did no
further harm. Two months later, however,
Benedict Arnold sailed up the James River
<pb n="65"/><anchor id="Pg65"/>with another fleet, and, after committing
some depredations at Richmond, sailed down
again, escaping by the aid of a favorable
wind, which hauled from east to west just
in the nick of time for him.
</p>

<p>
In June, 1781, Cornwallis invaded Virginia,
and no one suffered more than Jefferson
from his depredations. Tarleton was
dispatched to seize the governor at Monticello;
but the latter was forewarned by a
citizen of <anchor id="corr065"/><corr sic="Charlotteville">Charlottesville</corr>, who, being in a
tavern at Louisa when Tarleton and his
troop swept by on the main road, immediately
guessed their destination, and mounting
his horse, a fleet Virginia thoroughbred,
rode by a short cut through the woods
straight to Monticello, arriving there about
three hours ahead of Tarleton.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson took the matter coolly. He
first dispatched his family to a place of
safety, sent his best horse to be shod at a
neighboring smithy, and then proceeded to
sort and separate his papers. He left the
house only about five minutes before the
soldiers entered it.
</p>

<pb n="66"/><anchor id="Pg66"/>

<p>
Two slaves, Martin, Mr. Jefferson’s body
servant, and Cæsar, were engaged in hiding
plate and other articles under the floor
of the portico, a single plank having been
raised for that purpose. As Martin, above,
handed the last article to Cæsar under the
floor, the tramp of the approaching cavalry
was heard. Down went the plank, shutting
in Cæsar, and there he remained, without
making any outcry, for eighteen hours, in
darkness, and of course without food or
water. One of the soldiers, to try Martin’s
nerve, clapped a pistol to his breast, and
threatened to fire unless he would tell which
way his master had fled. <q>Fire away,
then,</q> retorted the black, fiercely answering
glance for glance, and not receding a hair’s
breath.
</p>

<p>
Tarleton and his men scrupulously refrained
from injuring Jefferson’s property.
Cornwallis, on the other hand, who encamped
on Jefferson’s estate of Elk Hill, lying opposite
Elk Island in the James River, destroyed
the growing crops, burned all the barns and
fences, carried off—<q>as was to be expected,</q>
<pb n="67"/><anchor id="Pg67"/>said Mr. Jefferson—the cattle and horses,
and committed the barbarity of killing the
colts that were too young to be of service.
He carried off, also, about thirty slaves.
<q>Had this been to give them freedom,</q>
wrote Jefferson, <q>he would have done right;
but it was to consign them to inevitable
death from the smallpox and putrid fever,
then raging in his camp.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Some of the miserable wretches crawled
home to die,</q> Mr. Randall relates, <q>and
giving information where others lay perishing
in hovels or in the open air, by the wayside,
these were sent for by their generous master;
and the last moments of all of them were
made as comfortable as could be done by
proper nursing and medical attendance.</q>
</p>

<p>
These dreadful scenes, added to the agitation
of having twice been obliged, at a moment’s
notice, to flee from the enemy, to say
nothing of the anxieties which she must have
endured on her husband’s account, were too
much for Mrs. Jefferson’s already enfeebled
constitution. She died on September 6,
1782.
</p>

<pb n="68"/><anchor id="Pg68"/>

<p>
Six slave women who were household servants
enjoyed for thirty years a kind of
humble distinction at Monticello as <q>the
servants who were in the room when Mrs.
Jefferson died;</q> and the fact that they
were there attests the affectionate relations
which must have existed between them and
their master and mistress. <q>They have
often told my wife,</q> relates Mr. Bacon,
<q>that when Mrs. Jefferson died they stood
around the bed. Mr. Jefferson sat by her,
and she gave him directions about a good
many things that she wanted done. When
she came to the children, she wept, and could
not speak for some time. Finally she held
up her hand, and, spreading out her four
fingers, she told him she could not die happy
if she thought her four children were ever to
have a stepmother brought in over them.
Holding her other hand in his, Mr. Jefferson
promised her solemnly that he would
never marry again;</q> and the promise was
kept.
</p>

<p>
After his wife’s death Jefferson sank into
what he afterward described as <q>a stupor of
<pb n="69"/><anchor id="Pg69"/>mind;</q> and even before that he had been,
for the first and last time in his life, in a
somewhat morbid mental condition. He was
an excessively sensitive man, and reflections
upon his conduct as governor, during the
raids into Virginia by Arnold and Cornwallis,
coming at a time when he was overwrought,
rankled in his mind. He refused to serve
again as governor, and desiring to defend
his course when in that office, became a
member of the House of Burgesses in 1781,
in order that he might answer his critics
there; but not a voice was raised against
him. In 1782, he was again elected to the
House, but he did not attend; and both
Madison and Monroe endeavored in vain to
draw him from his seclusion. To Monroe
he replied: <q>Before I ventured to declare
to my countrymen my determination to retire
from public employment, I examined
well my heart to know whether it were
thoroughly cured of every principle of political
ambition, whether no lurking particle
remained which might leave me uneasy, when
reduced within the limits of mere private
<pb n="70"/><anchor id="Pg70"/>life. I became satisfied that every fibre of
that passion was thoroughly eradicated.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson was an impulsive man,—in
some respects a creature of the moment;
certainly often, in his own case, mistaking,
as a permanent feeling, what was really a
transitory impression. His language to
Monroe must, therefore, be taken as the
sincere deliverance of a man who, at that
time, had not the remotest expectation of
receiving, or the least ambition to attain,
the highest offices in the gift of the American
people.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="71"/><anchor id="Pg71"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VII. Envoy at Paris"/><index index="pdf" level1="VII. Envoy at Paris"/>
<head>VII</head>

<head type="sub">ENVOY AT PARIS</head>

<p>
Two years after his wife’s death, namely,
in 1784, Jefferson was chosen by Congress
to serve as envoy at Paris, with John Adams
and Benjamin Franklin. The appointment
came at an opportune moment, when his
mind was beginning to recover its tone, and
he gladly accepted it. It was deemed necessary
that the new Confederacy should make
treaties with the various governments of
Europe, and as soon as the envoys reached
Paris, they drew up a treaty such as they
hoped might be negotiated. It has been
described as <q>the first serious attempt ever
made to conduct the intercourse of nations
on Christian principles;</q> and, on that account,
it failed. To this failure there was,
however, one exception. <q>Old Frederick of
Prussia,</q> as Jefferson styled him, <q>met us
<pb n="72"/><anchor id="Pg72"/>cordially;</q> and with him a treaty was soon
concluded.
</p>

<p>
In May, 1785, Franklin returned to the
United States, and Jefferson was appointed
minister. <q>You replace Dr. Franklin,</q>
said the Count of Vergennes when Jefferson
announced his appointment. <q>I succeed,—no
one can replace him,</q> was the reply.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s residence in Paris at this critical
period was a fortunate occurrence. It
would be a mistake to suppose that he derived
his political principles from France:—he
carried them there; but he was confirmed
in them by witnessing the injustice
and misery which resulted to the common
people from the monarchical governments of
Europe. To James Monroe he wrote in
June, 1785: <q>The pleasure of the trip [to
Europe] will be less than you expect, but
the utility greater. It will make you adore
your own country,—its soil, its climate, its
equality, laws, people, and manners. My
God! how little do my countrymen know
what precious blessings they are in possession
of and which no other people on earth
<pb n="73"/><anchor id="Pg73"/>enjoy! I confess I had no idea of it myself.</q>
</p>

<p>
To George Wythe he wrote in August,
1786: <q>Preach, my dear sir, a crusade
against ignorance; establish and improve
the law for educating the common people.
Let our countrymen know that the people
alone can protect us against these evils; and
that the tax which will be paid for this purpose
is not more than the thousandth part
of what will be paid to kings, priests, and
nobles, who will rise up among us if we
leave the people in ignorance.</q> To Madison,
he wrote in January, 1787: <q>This is a
<anchor id="corr073"/><corr sic="goverment">government</corr> of wolves over sheep.</q> Jefferson
took the greatest pains to ascertain the condition
of the laboring classes. In the course
of a journey in the south of France, he wrote
to Lafayette, begging him to survey the condition
of the people for himself. <q>To do
it most effectually,</q> he said, <q>you must be
absolutely incognito; you must ferret the
people out of their hovels, as I have done;
look into their kettles; eat their bread; loll
on their beds on pretense of resting your<pb n="74"/><anchor id="Pg74"/>self, but in fact to find if they are soft.
You will feel a sublime pleasure in the
course of the investigation, and a sublimer
one hereafter, when you shall be able to
apply your knowledge to the softening of
their beds, or the throwing a morsel of meat
into their kettle of vegetables.</q>
</p>

<p>
These excursions among the French peasantry,
who, as Jefferson well knew, were ruinously
taxed in order to support an extravagant
court and an idle and insolent nobility,
made him a fierce Republican. <q>There is
not a crowned head in Europe,</q> he wrote to
General Washington, in 1788, <q>whose talents
or merits would entitle him to be elected
a vestryman by the people of America.</q>
</p>

<p>
But for the French race Jefferson had an
affinity. He was glad to live with people
among whom, as he said, <q>a man might pass
a life without encountering a single rudeness.</q>
He liked their polished manners and
gay disposition, their aptitude for science, for
philosophy, and for art; even their wines
and cookery suited his taste, and his preference
in this respect was so well known that
<pb n="75"/><anchor id="Pg75"/>Patrick Henry once humorously stigmatized
him as <q>a man who had abjured his native
victuals.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s stay in Paris corresponded
exactly with the <q>glorious</q> period of the
French Revolution. He was present at the
Assembly of the Notables in 1787, and he
witnessed the destruction of the Bastille in
1789.
</p>

<p>
<q>The change in this country,</q> he wrote
in March, 1789, <q>is such as you can form
no idea of. The frivolities of conversation
have given way entirely to politics. Men,
women, and children talk nothing else ...
and mode has acted a wonderful part in the
present instance. All the handsome young
women, for example, are for the <hi rend="italic">tiers étât</hi>, and
this is an army more powerful in France
than the 200,000 men of the king.</q>
</p>

<p>
The truth is that an intellectual and
moral revolution preceded in France the
outbreak of the populace. There was an
interior conviction that the government of
the country was excessively unjust and oppressive.
A love of liberty, a feeling of
<pb n="76"/><anchor id="Pg76"/>fraternity, a passion for equality moved the
intellect and even the aristocracy of France.
In this crisis the reformers looked toward
America, for the United States had just
trodden the path upon which France was
entering. <q>Our proceedings,</q> wrote Jefferson
to Madison in 1789, <q>have been
viewed as a model for them on every occasion....
Our [authority] has been treated
like that of the Bible, open to explanation,
but not to question.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s advice was continually sought
by Lafayette and others; and his house,
maintained in the easy, liberal style of Virginia,
was a meeting place for the Revolutionary
statesmen. Jefferson dined at three
or four o’clock; and after the cloth had been
removed he and his guests sat over their
wine till nine or ten in the evening.
</p>

<p>
In July, 1789, the National Assembly
appointed a committee to draught a constitution,
and the committee formally invited
the American minister to assist at their sessions
and favor them with his advice. This
function he felt obliged to decline, as being
<pb n="77"/><anchor id="Pg77"/>inconsistent with his post of minister to the
king. No man had a nicer sense of propriety
than Jefferson; and he punctiliously
observed the requirements of his somewhat
difficult situation in Paris.
</p>

<p>
What gave Mr. Jefferson the greatest
anxiety and trouble, was our relations with
the piratical Barbary powers who held the
keys of the Mediterranean and sometimes
extended their depredations even into the
Atlantic. It was a question of paying tribute
or going to war; and most of the European
powers paid tribute. In 1784, for
example, the Dutch contributed to <q>the
high, glorious, mighty, and most noble,
King, Prince, and Emperor of Morocco,</q>
a mass of material which included thirty
cables, seventy cannon, sixty-nine masts,
twenty-one anchors, fifty dozen sail-needles,
twenty-four tons of pitch, two hundred and
eighty loaves of sugar, twenty-four China
punch-bowls, three clocks, and one <q>very
large watch.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson ascertained that the pirates
would require of the United States, as the
<pb n="78"/><anchor id="Pg78"/>price of immunity for its commerce, a tribute
of about three hundred thousand dollars
per annum. <q>Surely,</q> he wrote home, <q>our
people will not give this. Would it not be
better to offer them an equal treaty? If
they refuse, why not go to war with them?</q>
And he pressed upon Mr. Jay, who held the
secretaryship of foreign affairs, as the office
was then called, the immediate establishment
of a navy. But Congress would do nothing;
and it was not till Jefferson himself became
President that the Barbary pirates were dealt
with in a wholesome and stringent manner.
During the whole term of his residence at
Paris he was negotiating with the Mediterranean
powers for the release of unfortunate
Americans, many of whom spent the best
part of their lives in horrible captivity.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson’s self-imposed duties were
no less arduous. He kept four colleges informed
of the most valuable new inventions,
discoveries, and books. He had a Yankee
talent for mechanical improvements, and he
was always on the alert to obtain anything
of this nature which he thought might be
<pb n="79"/><anchor id="Pg79"/>useful at home. Jefferson himself, by the
way, invented the revolving armchair, the
buggy-top, and a mould board for a plough.
He bought books for Franklin, Madison,
Monroe, Wythe, and himself. He informed
one correspondent about Watt’s engine, another
about the new system of canals. He
smuggled rice from Turin in his coat pockets;
and he was continually dispatching to
agricultural societies in America seeds, roots,
nuts, and plants. Houdin was sent over by
him to make the statue of Washington;
and he forwarded designs for the new capitol
at Richmond. For Buffon he procured
the skin of an American panther, and also
the bones and hide of a New Hampshire
moose, to obtain which Governor Sullivan
of that State organized a hunting-party in
the depth of winter and cut a road through
the forest for twenty miles in order to bring
out his quarry.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson was the most indefatigable of
men, and he did not relax in Paris. He
had rooms at a Carthusian monastery to
which he repaired when he had some special
<pb n="80"/><anchor id="Pg80"/>work on hand. He kept a carriage and
horses, but could not afford a saddle horse.
Instead of riding, he took a walk every
afternoon, usually of six or seven miles, occasionally
twice as long. It was while returning
with a friend from one of these
excursions that he fell and fractured his
right wrist; and the fracture was set so imperfectly
that it troubled him ever afterward.
It was characteristic of Jefferson
that he said nothing to his friend as to the
injury until they reached home, though his
suffering from it was great; and, also, that
he at once began to write with the other
hand, making numerous entries, on the very
night of the accident, in a writing which,
though stiff, was, and remains, perfectly
clear.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson’s two daughters had been
placed at a convent school near Paris, and
he was surprised one day to receive a note
from Martha, the elder, asking his permission
to remain in the convent for the rest
of her life as a nun. For a day or two she
received no answer. Then her father called
<pb n="81"/><anchor id="Pg81"/>in his carriage, and after a short interview
with the abbess took his daughters away;
and thenceforth Martha presided, so far as
her age permitted, over her father’s household.
Not a word upon the subject of her
request ever passed between them; and long
afterward, in telling the story to her own
children, she praised Mr. Jefferson’s tact in
dealing with what she described as a transient
impulse.
</p>

<p>
After this incident, Jefferson, thinking
that it was time to take his daughters home,
obtained leave of absence for six months;
and the little family landed at Norfolk, November
18, 1789. They journeyed slowly
homeward, stopping at one friend’s house
after another, and, two days before Christmas,
arrived at Monticello, where they were
rapturously greeted by the slaves, who took
the four horses from the carriage and drew
it up the steep incline themselves; and
when he alighted, Mr. Jefferson, in spite of
himself, was carried into the house on the
arms of his black servants and friends.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="82"/><anchor id="Pg82"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VIII. Secretary of State"/><index index="pdf" level1="VIII. Secretary of State"/>
<head>VIII</head>

<head type="sub">SECRETARY OF STATE</head>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson had a strong desire to
resume his post as minister to France, but
he yielded to Washington’s earnest request
that he should become Secretary of State in
the new government. He lingered long
enough at Monticello to witness the marriage
of his daughter Martha to Thomas
Mann Randolph, and then set out upon a
cold, wet journey of twenty-one days, reaching
New York, which was then the seat of
government, late in March, 1790. He hired
a small house at No. 57 Maiden Lane, and
immediately attacked the arrears of work
which had been accumulating for six months.
The unusual confinement, aggravated, perhaps,
by a homesickness, clearly revealed in
his letters, for his daughters and for Monticello,
brought on what seems to have been a
<pb n="83"/><anchor id="Pg83"/>neuralgic headache which lasted for three
weeks. It may have been caused in part
by the climate of New York, as to which
Mr. Jefferson observed: <q>Spring and fall
they never have, so far as I can learn. They
have ten months of winter, two of summer,
with some winter days interspersed.</q> But
there were other causes beside homesickness
and headache which made Jefferson unhappy
in his new position. Long afterward he
described them as follows:—
</p>

<p>
<q>I had left France in the first year of
her Revolution, in the fervor of natural
rights and zeal for reformation. My conscientious
devotion to those rights could not
be heightened, but it had been aroused and
excited by daily exercise. The President
received me cordially, and my colleagues
and the circle of principal citizens apparently
with welcome. The courtesies of dinners
given to me, as a stranger newly arrived
among them, placed me at once in their familiar
society. But I cannot describe the
wonder and mortification with which the
table conversations filled me. Politics were
<pb n="84"/><anchor id="Pg84"/>the chief topic, and a preference of kingly
over republican government was evidently
the favorite sentiment. An apostate I
could not be, nor yet a hypocrite; and I
found myself for the most part the only advocate
on the republican side of the question,
unless among the guests there chanced
to be some member of that party from the
legislative houses.</q>
</p>

<p>
It must be remembered that Jefferson’s
absence in France had been the period of
the Confederacy, when the inability of Congress
to enforce its laws and to control the
States was so evident and so disastrous that
the need of a stronger central government
had been impressed on men’s minds. The
new Constitution had been devised to supply
that need, but it was elastic in its terms, and
it avoided all details. Should it be construed
in an aristocratic or in a democratic spirit,
and should the new nation be given an aristocratic
or a democratic twist? This was a
burning question, and it gave rise to that
long struggle led by Hamilton on one side
and by Jefferson on the other, which ended
<pb n="85"/><anchor id="Pg85"/>with the election of Jefferson as President
in the year 1800.
</p>

<p>
Hamilton and his party utterly disbelieved
in government by the people.<note place="foot">The father of Miss Catherine Sedgwick was a leading
Federalist, and his daughter records that, though a
most kind-hearted man, he habitually spoke of the people
as <q>Jacobins</q> and <q>miscreants.</q></note> John Adams
declared that the English Constitution, barring
its element of corruption, was an ideal
constitution. Hamilton went farther and
asserted that the English form of government,
corruption and all, was the best practicable
form. An aristocratic senate, chosen
for a long term, if not for life, was thought
to be essential even by Mr. Adams. Hamilton’s
notion was that mankind were incapable
of self-government, and must be governed
in one or two ways,—by force or by
fraud. Property was, in his view, the ideal
basis of government; and he was inclined to
fix the possession of <q>a thousand Spanish
dollars</q> as the proper qualification for a
voter.
</p>

<p>
The difference between the Hamiltonian
and the Jeffersonian view arises chiefly from
<pb n="86"/><anchor id="Pg86"/>a different belief as to the connection between
education and morality. All aristocratic systems
must, in the last analysis, be founded
either upon brute force or else upon the
assumption that education and morality go
hand-in-hand, and that the well-to-do and
best educated class is morally superior to the
less educated. Jefferson rejected this assumption,
and all real believers in democracy
must take their stand with him. He once
stated his creed upon this point in a letter as
follows:—
</p>

<p>
<q>The moral sense or conscience is as
much a part of man as his leg or arm....
It may be strengthened by exercise, as may
any particular limb of the body. This sense
is submitted, indeed, in some degree to the
guidance of reason, but it is a small stock
which is required for this, even a less one
than what we call common sense. State a
moral case to a ploughman and a professor.
The former will decide it as well and often
better than the latter, because he has not
been led astray by artificial rules.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is sound philosophy. The great prob<pb n="87"/><anchor id="Pg87"/>lems in government, whether they relate to
matters external or internal, are moral, not
intellectual. There are, indeed, purely intellectual
problems, such as the question between
free silver and a gold standard; and as
to these problems, the people may go wrong.
But they are not vital. No nation ever yet
achieved glory or incurred destruction by taking
one course rather than another in a matter
of trade or finance. The crucial questions
are moral questions, and experience has
shown that as to such matters the people
can be trusted. As Jefferson himself said,
<q>The will of the majority, the natural law
of every society, is the only sure guardian of
the rights of man. Perhaps even this may
sometimes err; but its errors are honest, solitary,
and short-lived.</q>
</p>

<p>
Washington’s cabinet was made up on the
theory that it should represent not the party
in power, but both parties,—for two parties
already existed, the Federalists and the anti-Federalists,
who, under Jefferson’s influence,
soon became known by the better name of
Republicans. The cabinet consisted of four
<pb n="88"/><anchor id="Pg88"/>members, Jefferson, Secretary of State, Hamilton,
Secretary of the Treasury, Henry Knox,
Secretary of War, and Edmund Randolph,
Attorney-General.
</p>

<p>
Knox sided almost always with Hamilton,
and Randolph was an inconstant supporter
of Jefferson. Though an able and learned
man, he was given to hair-splitting and hesitation,
and, in allusion to his habit of arguing
on one side, but finally voting upon the other,
Jefferson once remarked that he usually gave
the shell to his friends, and reserved the
oyster for his opponents.
</p>

<p>
The political opinions of Jefferson and
Hamilton were so diametrically opposed that
the cabinet was soon torn by dissension.
Hamilton was for a strong government, for
surrounding the President with pomp and
etiquette, for a central authority as against
the authority of the States. In pursuance of
these ideas, he brought forward his famous
measures for assumption of the state debts
by the national government, for the funding
of the national debt, and finally for the creation
of a national bank. Jefferson opposed
<pb n="89"/><anchor id="Pg89"/>these measures, and, although the assumption
and the funding laws had grave faults, and
led to speculation, and in the case of many
persons to financial ruin, yet it must be admitted
that Jefferson never appreciated their
merits.
</p>

<p>
The truth is that both Hamilton and Jefferson
were essential to the development of
this country; and the principles of each have
been adopted in part, and rejected in part.
Hamilton’s conception of a central government
predominating over the state governments
has been realized, though not nearly
to the extent to which he would have carried
it. On the other hand, his various schemes
for making the government into an aristocracy
instead of a democracy have all been
abandoned, or, like the Electoral College,
turned to a use the opposite of what he intended.
So, Jefferson’s view of state rights
has not strictly been maintained; but his
fundamental principles of popular government
and popular education have made the
United States what it is, and are destined,
we hope, when fully developed, to make it
something better yet.
</p>

<pb n="90"/><anchor id="Pg90"/>

<p>
No less an authority than that of Washington,
who appreciated the merits of both
men, could have kept the peace between
them. Hamilton under an assumed name
attacked Jefferson in the public prints. Jefferson
never published a line unsigned; but
he permitted Philip Freneau, who had slight
employment as a translator in his department,
and the trifling salary of $250 a year,
to wage war against Hamilton in the gazette
which Freneau published; and he even stood
by while Freneau attacked Washington.
Washington indeed once gave Jefferson a
hint on this subject, which the latter refused
to take. <q>He was evidently sore and warm,</q>
wrote Jefferson, <q>and I took his intention to
be that I should interfere in some way with
Freneau, perhaps withdraw his appointment
of translating clerk to my office. But I will
not do it. His paper has saved our constitution,
which was galloping fast into monarchy....
And the President has not, ...
with his usual good sense and <hi rend="italic">sang froid</hi>,
... seen that, though some bad things had
passed through it to the public, yet the good
have predominated immensely.</q>
</p>

<pb n="91"/><anchor id="Pg91"/>

<p>
In the spring of 1792, Jefferson, who had
now been two years in office, was extremely
anxious to retire, not only because his situation
at Washington was unpleasant, but
because his affairs at home had been so neglected
during his long absences that he was
in danger of bankruptcy. His estate was
large, but it was incumbered by a debt to
English creditors of $13,000. Some years
before he had sold for cash a farm near
Monticello in order to discharge this debt;
but at that time the Revolutionary war had
begun, and the Virginia legislature passed
an act inviting all men owing money to English
creditors to deposit the same in the state
treasury, the State agreeing to pay it over to
the English creditors after the war. Jefferson
accordingly deposited the $13,000 in gold
which he had just received. Later, however,
this law was rescinded, and the money received
under it was paid back, not in gold,
but in paper money of the State, which was
then so depreciated as to be almost worthless.
In riding by the farm thus disposed
of, Jefferson in after years would sometimes
<pb n="92"/><anchor id="Pg92"/>point to it and say: <q>That farm I once sold
for an overcoat;</q>—the price of the overcoat
having been the $13,000 in paper money.
Cornwallis, as we have seen, destroyed Jefferson’s
property to an amount more than
double this debt, which might be considered
as a second payment of it; but Jefferson
finally paid it the third time,—and this
time into the hands of the actual creditor.
Meanwhile, he wrote: <q>The torment of
mind I endure till the moment shall arrive
when I shall not owe a shilling on earth is
such really as to render life of little value.</q>
</p>

<p>
Urged by all these motives, Jefferson had
resolved to resign his office in 1792, notwithstanding
the remonstrances of Washington;
but the attacks made upon him by
the Federalists, especially those made in the
newspapers, were so violent that a retirement
at that time would have given the public
cause to believe that he had been driven
from office by his enemies. Jefferson,
therefore, concluded to remain Secretary of
State a few months longer; and those few,
as it happened, were the most important of
the whole term.
</p>

<pb n="93"/><anchor id="Pg93"/>

<p>
On January 21, 1793, King Louis of
France was executed, and within a week
thereafter England was at war with the new
rulers of the French. Difficult questions at
once arose under our treaties with France.
The French people thought that we were in
honor bound to assist them in their struggle
against Great Britain, as they had assisted
us; and they sent over as minister <q>Citizen</q>
Genet, in the frigate L’Embuscade.
The frigate, carrying forty guns and three
hundred men, sailed into the harbor of
Charleston, April 8, <anchor id="corr093"/><corr sic="1795">1793</corr>, with a liberty-cap
for her figure-head, and a British prize in
her wake. Citizen Genet, even for a Frenchman,
was a most indiscreet and hot-headed
person, and before he had been a week on
shore he had issued commissions to privateers
manned by American citizens. L’Embuscade
then proceeded to Philadelphia,
where, as in Charleston, Citizen Genet was
welcomed with the utmost enthusiasm. His
coming was hailed by the Republicans generally
with rapture; and their cry was for
war. <q>I wish,</q> wrote Jefferson, in a con<pb n="94"/><anchor id="Pg94"/>fidential letter to Monroe, <q>that we may be
able to repress the people within the limits
of a fair neutrality.</q>
</p>

<p>
This was the position taken also by
Washington and the whole cabinet; and it
is a striking example of Jefferson’s wisdom,
justice, and firmness, that, although the
bulk of the Republicans were carried off
their feet by sympathy with France and
with Genet, he, the very person in the United
States who most loved the French and best
understood the causes and motives of the
French Revolution, withstood the storm, and
kept his eye fixed upon the interests of his
own country. England, contrary to the
treaty which closed the Revolutionary War,
still retained her military posts in the west;
and she was the undisputed mistress of the
sea. War with her would therefore have
been suicidal for the United States. The
time for that had not yet come. Moreover,
if the United States had taken sides with
France, a war with Spain also would inevitably
have followed; and Spain then held
Florida and the mouth of the Mississippi.
</p>

<pb n="95"/><anchor id="Pg95"/>

<p>
Nevertheless, there were different ways of
preserving neutrality: there were the offensive
way and the friendly way. Hamilton,
whose extreme bias toward England made
him bitter against France, was always for
the one; Jefferson for the other. A single
example will suffice as an illustration. M.
Genet asked as a favor that the United
States should advance an installment of its
debt to France. Hamilton advised that the
request be refused without a word of explanation.
Jefferson’s opinion was that the
request should be granted, if that were lawful,
and if it were found to be unlawful, them
that the refusal should be explained. Mr.
Jefferson’s advice was followed.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson, also, though he firmly withstood
the many illegal and unwarrantable
acts attempted by Genet, did so in such a
manner as not to lose the friendship of the
minister or even a degree of control over
him. To Madison Jefferson wrote of Genet:
<q>He renders my position immensely difficult.
He does me justice personally; and giving
him time to vent himself and become more
<pb n="96"/><anchor id="Pg96"/>cool, I am on a footing to advise him freely,
and he respects it; but he will break out
again on the very first occasion.</q>
</p>

<p>
Finally Citizen Genet, becoming desperate,
fitted out one of L’Embuscade’s prizes
as a frigate to be used against England,
which amounted on the part of the United
States to a breach of neutrality; and being
hindered in sending her to sea, he threatened
to appeal from the President to the
people of the United States. Thereupon
the question arose, what shall be done with
Genet? and upon this question the cabinet
divided with more than usual acrimony.
Knox was for sending him out of the country
without ceremony; Hamilton for publishing
the whole correspondence between
him and the government, with a statement
of his proceedings. Jefferson was for sending
an account of the affair to the French
government, with copies of the correspondence,
and a request for Genet’s recall.
Meanwhile the whole country was thrown
into a state of tumultuous excitement. There
was a riot in Philadelphia; and even the
<pb n="97"/><anchor id="Pg97"/>sacred character of Washington was assailed
in prose and verse.
</p>

<p>
The President decided to adopt the course
proposed by Jefferson; France appointed
another minister, and the Genet episode
ended by his marriage to a daughter of
George Clinton, governor of New York, in
which State he lived thereafter as a respectable
citizen and a patron of agriculture.
He died in the year 1834.
</p>

<p>
The summer of delirium at Philadelphia
culminated in the panic and desolation of
the yellow fever, and every member of the
government fled from the city, Jefferson being
the last to depart.
</p>

<p>
When, in the next year, the correspondence
between Genet and Jefferson, and between
the English minister and Jefferson,
was published, the Secretary was seen to
have conducted it on his part with so much
ability, discretion, and tact, and with so
true a sense of what was due to each nation
concerned, that he may be said to have retired
to his farm in a blaze of glory.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="98"/><anchor id="Pg98"/>
<index index="toc" level1="IX. The Two Parties"/><index index="pdf" level1="IX. The Two Parties"/>
<head>IX</head>

<head type="sub">THE TWO PARTIES</head>

<p>
When Jefferson at last found himself at
Monticello, having resigned his office as
Secretary of State, he declared and believed
that he had done with politics forever. To
various correspondents he wrote as follows:
<q>I think that I shall never take another
newspaper of any sort. I find my mind
totally absorbed in my rural occupations....
No <anchor id="corr098"/><corr sic="circumtances">circumstances</corr>, my dear sir, will ever
more tempt me to engage in anything public....
I would not give up my retirement for
the empire of the universe.</q>
</p>

<p>
When Madison wrote in 1795, soliciting
him to accept the Republican nomination
for the presidency, Mr. Jefferson replied:
<q>The little spice of ambition which I had
in my younger days has long since evaporated,
and I set still less store by a posthumous
than present fame. The question
<pb n="99"/><anchor id="Pg99"/>is forever closed with me.</q> Nevertheless,
within a few months Mr. Jefferson accepted
the nomination, chiefly, it is probable, because,
with his usual sagacity, he foresaw that the
Republican candidate would be defeated as
President, but elected as Vice-President. It
must be remembered that at that time the
candidate receiving the next to the highest
number of electoral votes was declared to be
Vice-President; so that there was always a
probability that the presidential candidate
of the party defeated would be chosen to the
second office.
</p>

<p>
There were several reasons why Jefferson
would have been glad to receive the office of
Vice-President. It involved no disagreeable
responsibility; it called for no great expenditure
of money in the way of entertainments;
it carried a good salary; it required
only a few months’ residence at Washington.
<q>Mr. Jefferson often told me,</q> remarks
Mr. Bacon, <q>that the office of Vice-President
was far preferable to that of President.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson therefore became the Republican
nominee for President, and, as he doubt<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>less expected, was elected Vice-President,
the vote standing as follows: Adams, 71;
Jefferson, 68; Pinckney, 59; Burr, 30.
</p>

<p>
It is significant of Mr. Jefferson’s high
standing in the country that many people
believed that he would not deign to accept
the office of Vice-President; and Madison
wrote advising him to come to Washington
on the 4th of March, and take the oath of
office, in order that this belief might be dispelled.
Jefferson accordingly did so, bringing
with him the bones of a mastodon, lately
discovered, and a little manuscript book written
in his law-student days, marked <q>Parliamentary
Pocket-Book.</q> This was the basis
of that careful and elaborate <q>Manual of
Parliamentary Practice</q> which Jefferson left
as his legacy to the Senate.
</p>

<p>
Upon receiving news of the election Jefferson
had written to Madison: <q>If Mr.
Adams can be induced to administer the government
on its true principles, and to relinquish
his bias to an English Constitution, it
is to be considered whether it would not be,
on the whole, for the public good to come to
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>a good understanding with him as to his
future elections. He is perhaps the only
sure barrier against Hamilton’s getting in.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Adams, indeed, at the outset of his
administration, was inclined to be confidential
with Mr. Jefferson; but soon, by one of
those sudden turns not infrequent with him,
he took a different course, and thenceforth
treated the Vice-President with nothing more
than bare civility.
</p>

<p>
It was a time, indeed, when cordial relations
between Federalist and Republican were almost
impossible. In a letter written at this
period to Mr. Edward Rutledge, Jefferson
said: <q>You and I have formerly seen warm
debates, and high political passions. But
gentlemen of different politics would then
speak to each other, and separate the business
of the Senate from that of society. It is not
so now. Men who have been intimate all
their lives cross the street to avoid meeting,
and turn their heads another way, lest they
should be obliged to touch their hats.</q>
</p>

<p>
These party feelings were intensified in the
year 1798 by what is known as the X Y Z
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>business. Mr. Adams had sent three commissioners
to Paris to negotiate a treaty.
Talleyrand, the French Minister for Foreign
Affairs, held aloof from them; but they were
informed by certain mysterious agents that
a treaty could be had on three conditions,
(1) that the President should apologize for
certain expressions in his recent message to
Congress; (2) that the United States should
loan a large sum of money to the French
government; (3) that a <hi rend="italic">douceur</hi> of $25,000
should be given to Talleyrand’s agents.
</p>

<p>
These insulting proposals were indignantly
rejected by the commissioners, and being reported
in this country, they aroused a storm
of popular indignation. Preparations for war
were made forthwith. General Washington,
though in failing health, was appointed
commander-in-chief,—the real command being
expected to devolve upon Hamilton, who
was named second; men and supplies were
voted; letters of marque were issued, and war
actually prevailed upon the high seas. The
situation redounded greatly to the advantage
of the Federalists, for they were always as
<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>eager to go to war with France as they were
reluctant to go to war with England. The
newly appointed officers were drawn almost,
if not quite, without exception from the Federalist
party, and Hamilton seemed to be on
the verge of that military career which he
had long hoped for. He trusted, as his most
intimate friend, Gouverneur Morris, said after
his death, <q>that in the changes and chances
of time we would be involved in some war
which might strengthen our union and nerve
our executive.</q> So late as 1802, Hamilton
wrote to Morris, <q>there must be a systematic
and persevering endeavor to establish the
future of a great empire on foundations much
firmer than have yet been devised.</q> At this
very time he was negotiating with Miranda
and with the British government, his design
being to use against Mexico the army raised
in expectation of a war with France.
</p>

<p>
Hamilton was not the man to overturn
the government out of personal ambition,
nor even in order to set up a monarchy in
place of a republic. But he had convinced
himself that the republic must some day fall
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>of its own weight. He was always anticipating
a <q>crisis,</q> and this word is repeated
over and over again in his correspondence.
It even occurs in the crucial sentence of that
pathetic document which he wrote on the eve
of his fatal duel. When the <q>crisis</q> came,
Hamilton meant to be on hand; and, if possible,
at the head of an army.
</p>

<p>
However, the X Y Z affair ended peacefully.
The warlike spirit shown by the people
of the United States had a wholesome effect
upon the French government; and at their
suggestion new envoys were sent over by the
President, by whom a treaty was negotiated.
This wise and patriotic act upon the part of
Mr. Adams was a benefit to his country, but
it aroused the bitter anger of the Federalists
and ruined his position in that party.
</p>

<p>
But what was Mr. Jefferson’s attitude
during this business? He was not for war,
and he contended that a distinction should
be made between the acts of Talleyrand and
his agents, and the real disposition of the
French people. He wrote as follows: <q>Inexperienced
in such manœuvres, the people
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>did not permit themselves even to suspect
that the turpitude of private swindlers might
mingle itself unobserved, and give its own
hue to the communications of the French
government, of whose participation there was
neither proof nor probability.</q> And again:
<q>But as I view a peace between France and
England the ensuing winter to be certain,
I have thought it would have been better for
us to have contrived to bear from France
through the present summer what we have
been bearing both from her and from England
these four years, and still continue to
bear from England, and to have required indemnification
in the hour of peace, when, I
firmly believe, it would have been yielded
by both.</q>
</p>

<p>
But this is bad political philosophy. A
nation cannot obtain justice by submitting
to wrongs or insults even for a time. Jefferson
himself had written long before: <q>I
think it is our interest to punish the first
insult, because an insult unpunished is the
parent of many others.</q> It is possible that
he was misled at this juncture by his liking
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>for France, and by his dislike of the Federalists
and of their British proclivities. It is
true that the bribe demanded by Talleyrand’s
agents might be considered, to use
Mr. Jefferson’s words, as <q>the turpitude of
private swindlers;</q> but the demand for a
loan and for a retraction could be regarded
only as national acts, being acts of the
French government, although the bulk of
the French people might repudiate them.
</p>

<p>
Whether Jefferson was right or wrong in
the position which he took, he maintained it
with superb self-confidence and aplomb. For
the moment, the Federalists had everything
their own way. They carried the election.
Hamilton’s oft-anticipated <q>crisis</q> seemed
to have arrived at last. But Jefferson coolly
waited till the storm should blow over. <q>Our
countrymen,</q> he wrote to a friend, <q>are essentially
Republicans. They retain unadulterated
the principles of ’76, and those who
are conscious of no change in themselves
have nothing to fear in the long run.</q>
</p>

<p>
And so it proved. The ascendency of
the Federalists was soon destroyed, and de<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>stroyed forever, by the political crimes and
follies which they committed; and especially
by the alien and sedition laws. The reader
need hardly be reminded that the alien law
gave the President authority to banish from
the country <q>all such aliens as <hi rend="italic">he</hi> should
judge dangerous to the peace and safety
of the United States,</q>—a despotic power
which no king of England ever possessed.
The sedition act made it a crime, punishable
by fine and imprisonment, to speak or write
anything <q>false, scandalous, and malicious,</q>
with intent to excite against either House of
Congress or against the President, <q>the hatred
of the good people of the United States.</q>
It can readily be seen what gross oppression
was possible under this elastic law, interpreted
by judges who, to a man, were members
of the Federal party. Matthew Lyon, of
Vermont, ventured to read aloud at a political
meeting a letter which he had received
expressing astonishment that the President’s
recent address to the House of Representatives
had not been answered by <q>an order
to send him to a mad-house.</q> For this Mr.
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>Lyon was fined $1,000, and imprisoned in a
veritable dungeon.
</p>

<p>
These unconstitutional and un-American
laws were vigorously opposed by Jefferson
and Madison. In October, 1798, Jefferson
wrote: <q>For my own part I consider those
laws as merely an experiment on the American
mind to see how far it will bear an
avowed violation of the Constitution. If
this goes down, we shall immediately see
attempted another act of Congress declaring
that the President shall continue in office
during life, reserving to another occasion
the transfer of the succession to his heirs,
and the establishment of the Senate for
life.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson also prepared the famous Kentucky
resolutions, which were adopted by
the legislature of that State,—the authorship,
however, being kept secret till Jefferson
avowed it, twenty years later. These
much-discussed resolutions have been said
to have originated the doctrine of nullification,
and to contain that principle of secession
upon which the South acted in 1861.
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>They may be summed up roughly as follows:
The source of all political power is in
the people. The people have, by the compact
known as the Constitution, granted certain
specified powers to the federal government;
all other powers, if not granted to the several
state governments, are retained by the
people. The alien and sedition laws assume
the exercise by the federal government of
powers not granted to it by the Constitution.
They are therefore void.
</p>

<p>
Thus far there can be no question that
Jefferson’s argument was sound, and its
soundness would not be denied, even at the
present day. But the question then arose:
what next? May the laws be disregarded
and disobeyed by the States or by individuals,
or must they be obeyed until some competent
authority has pronounced them void?
and if so, what is that authority? We understand
now that the Supreme Court has
sole authority to decide upon the constitutionality
of the acts of Congress. It was so
held, for the first time, in the year 1803, in
the case of Marbury <hi rend="italic">v.</hi> Madison, by Chief
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>Justice Marshall and his associates; and that
decision, though resisted at the time, has
long been accepted by the country as a
whole. But this case did not arise until
several years after the Kentucky Resolutions
were written. Moreover, Marshall was an
extreme Federalist, and his view was by no
means the commonly accepted view. Jefferson
scouted it. He protested all his life
against the assumption that the Supreme
Court, a body of men appointed for life, and
thus removed from all control by the people,
should have the enormous power of construing
the Constitution and of passing upon
the validity of national laws. In a letter
written in 1804, he said: <q>You seem to
think it devolved on the judges to decide
the validity of the sedition law. But nothing
in the Constitution has given them a
right to decide for the executive more than
the executive to decide for them. But the
opinion which gives to the judges the right
to decide what laws are constitutional and
what not—not only for themselves in their
own sphere of action, but for the legislature
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>and executive also in their spheres—would
make the judiciary a despotic branch.</q><note place="foot">Abraham Lincoln said in his first inaugural address:—<q>But
if the policy of the government upon a vital
question affecting the whole people is to be irrevocably
fixed by the decisions of the Supreme Court, the moment
they are made, the people will cease to be their own
masters; having to that extent resigned their government
into the hands of that eminent tribunal.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
In the Kentucky resolutions, Jefferson
argued, first, that the Constitution was a
compact between the States; secondly, that
no person or body had been appointed by
the Constitution as a common judge in respect
to questions arising under the Constitution
between any one State and Congress,
or between the people and Congress; and
thirdly, <q>as in all other cases of compact
among powers having no common judge,
each party has an equal right to judge for
itself, as well of infractions as of the mode
and measure of redress.</q> It was open to
him to take this view, because it had not
yet been decided that the Supreme Court
was the <q>common judge</q> appointed by the
Constitution; and the Constitution itself
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>was not explicit upon the point. Moreover,
the laws in question had not been passed
upon by the Supreme Court,—they expired
by limitation before that stage was reached.
</p>

<p>
It must be admitted, then, that the Kentucky
resolutions do contain the principles
of nullification. But at the time when they
were written, nullification was a permissible
doctrine, because it was not certainly excluded
by the Constitution. In 1803, as we
have seen, the Constitution was interpreted
by the Supreme Court as excluding this
doctrine; and that decision having been reaffirmed
repeatedly, and having been acquiesced
in by the nation for fifty years, may
fairly be said to have become by the year
1861 the law of the land.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson, however, by no means intended
to push matters to their logical conclusion.
His resolutions were intended for moral
effect, as he explained in the following letter
to Madison:—
</p>

<p>
<q>I think we should distinctly affirm all
the important principles they contain, so as
to hold to that ground in future, and leave
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>the matter in such a train that we may not
be committed absolutely to push the matter
to extremities, and yet may be free to push
as far as events will render prudent.</q>
</p>

<p>
As to the charge that the Kentucky Resolutions
imply the doctrine of secession, as
well as that of nullification, it has no basis.
The two doctrines do not stand or fall together.
There is nothing in the resolutions
which implies the right of secession. Jefferson,
like most Americans of his day, contemplated
with indifference the possibility of an
ultimate separation of the region beyond the
Mississippi from the United States. But
nobody placed a higher value than he did on
what he described <q>as our union, the last
anchor of our hope, and that alone which is
to prevent this heavenly country from becoming
an arena of gladiators.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>
<index index="toc" level1="X. President Jefferson"/><index index="pdf" level1="X. President Jefferson"/>
<head>X</head>

<head type="sub">PRESIDENT JEFFERSON</head>

<p>
For the presidential election of 1800,
Adams was again the candidate on the Federal
side, and Jefferson on the Republican
side. Jefferson, by interviews, by long and
numerous letters, by the commanding force
of his own intellect and character, had at
last welded the anti-Federal elements into a
compact and disciplined Republican party.
The contest was waged with the utmost bitterness,
and especially with bitterness against
Jefferson. For this there were several causes.
Jefferson had deeply offended two powerful
classes in Virginia, the old aristocratic and
Tory element, and—excluding the dissenters—the
religious element; the former, by
the repeal of the law of entail, and the latter
by the statute for freedom of religion in Virginia.
These were among the most meritorious
acts of his life, but they produced an
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>intense enmity which lasted till his death
and even beyond his death. Jefferson, also,
though at times over-cautious, was at times
rash and indiscreet, and the freedom of his
comments upon men and measures often got
him into trouble. His career will be misunderstood
unless it is remembered that he
was an impulsive man. His judgments were
intuitive, and though usually correct, yet
sometimes hasty and ill-considered.
</p>

<p>
Above all, Jefferson was both for friends
and foes the embodiment of Republicanism.
He represented those ideas which the Federalists,
and especially the New England lawyers
and clergy, really believed to be subversive
of law and order, of government and
religion. To them he figured as <q>a fanatic
in politics, and an atheist in religion;</q> and
they were so disposed to believe everything
bad of him that they swallowed whole the
worst slanders which the political violence
of the times, far exceeding that of the present
day, could invent. We have seen with
what tenderness Jefferson treated his widowed
sister, Mrs. Carr, and her children.
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>It was in reference to this very family that
the Rev. Mr. Cotton Mather Smith, of Connecticut,
declared that Jefferson had gained
his estate by robbery, namely, by robbing a
widow and her children of £10,000, <q>all of
which can be proved.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson, as we have said, was a deist.
He was a religious man and a daily reader
of the Bible, far less extreme in his notions,
less hostile to orthodox Christianity than
John Adams. Nevertheless,—partly, perhaps,
because he had procured the disestablishment
of the Virginia Church, partly on
account of his scientific tastes and his liking
for French notions,—the Federalists
had convinced themselves that he was a violent
atheist and anti-Christian. It was a
humorous saying of the time that the old
women of New England hid their Bibles in
the well when Jefferson’s election in 1800
became known.
</p>

<p>
The vote was as follows:—Jefferson, 73,
Burr, 73; Adams, 65; C. C. Pinckney, 64;
Jay, 1. There being a tie between Jefferson
and Burr, the Republican candidate for
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>Vice-President, the election was thrown
into the House of Representatives, voting by
States. In that House the Federalists were
in the majority, but they did not have a majority
by States. They could not, therefore,
elect Adams; but it was possible for them
to make Burr President instead of Jefferson.
At first, the leaders were inclined to do
this, some believing that Burr’s utter want
of principle was less dangerous than the pernicious
principles which they ascribed to
Jefferson, and others thinking that Burr, if
elected by Federal votes, would pursue a
Federal policy. It was feared that Jefferson
would wipe out the national debt, abolish
the navy, and remove every Federal officeholder
in the land. He was approached from
many quarters, and even President Adams
desired him to give some intimation of his
intended policy on these points, but Jefferson
firmly refused.
</p>

<p>
As to one such interview, with Gouverneur
Morris, Jefferson wrote afterward: <q>I told
him that I should leave the world to judge
of the course I meant to pursue, by that
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>which I had pursued hitherto, believing it
to be my duty to be passive and silent during
the present scene; that I should certainly
make no terms; should never go into the
office of President by capitulation, nor with
my hands tied by any conditions which
would hinder me from pursuing the measures
which I should deem for the public good.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Federalists had a characteristic plan:
they proposed to pass a law devolving the
Presidency upon the chairman of the Senate,
in case the office of President should become
vacant; and this vacancy they would be able
to bring about by prolonging the election
until Mr. Adams’s term of office had expired.
The chairman of the Senate, a Federalist, of
course, would then become President. This
scheme Jefferson and his friends were prepared
to resist by force. <q>Because,</q> as he
afterward explained, <q>that precedent once
set, it would be artificially reproduced, and
would soon end in a dictator.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hamilton, to his credit, be it said, strongly
advocated the election of Jefferson; and
finally, through the action of Mr. Bayard,
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>of Delaware, a leading Federalist, who had
sounded an intimate friend of Mr. Jefferson
as to his views upon the points already mentioned,
Mr. Jefferson was elected President,
and the threatening civil war was averted.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Adams, who was deeply chagrined by
his defeat, did not attend the inauguration
of his successor, but left Washington
in his carriage, at sunrise, on the fourth of
March; and Jefferson rode on horseback to
the Capitol, unattended, and dismounting,
fastened his horse to the fence with his own
hands. The inaugural address, brief, and
beautifully worded, surprised most of those
who heard it by the moderation and liberality
of its tone. <q>Let us,</q> said the new President,
<q>restore to social intercourse that harmony
and affection without which liberty,
and even life itself, are but dreary things.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson served two terms, and he was
succeeded first by Madison, and then by
Monroe, both of whom were his friends and
disciples, and imbued with his ideas. They,
also, were reëlected. For
twenty-four years,
therefore, Jefferson and Jeffersonian De<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>mocracy predominated in the government of
the United States, and the period was an
exceedingly prosperous one. Not one of the
dismal forebodings of the Federalists was
fulfilled; and the practicability of popular
government was proved.
</p>

<p>
The first problem with which Jefferson
had to deal was that of appointments to
office. The situation was much like that
which afterward confronted President Cleveland
when he entered upon his first term,—that
is, every place was filled by a member
of the party opposed to the new administration.
The principle which Mr. Jefferson
adopted closely resembles that afterward
adopted by Mr. Cleveland, namely, no officeholder
was to be displaced on account of his
political belief; but if he acted aggressively
in politics, that was to be sufficient ground
for removal. <q>Electioneering activity</q> was
the phrase used in Mr. Jefferson’s time, and
<q>offensive partisanship</q> in Mr. Cleveland’s.
</p>

<p>
The following letter from President Jefferson
to the Secretary of the Treasury will
show how the rule was construed by him:—
</p>

<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>

<p>
<q>The allegations against Pope [collector]
of New Bedford are insufficient. Although
meddling in political caucuses is no part of
that freedom of personal suffrage which
ought to be allowed him, yet his mere presence
at a caucus does not necessarily involve
an active and official influence in opposition
to the government which employs
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
There were some lapses, but, on the whole,
Mr. Jefferson’s rule was adhered to; and it
is difficult to say whether he received more
abuse from the Federalists on account of the
removals which he did make, or from a faction
in his own party on account of the
removals which he refused to make.
</p>

<p>
His principle was thus stated in a letter:
<q>If a due participation of office is a matter
of right, how are vacancies to be obtained?
Those by death are few; by resignation,
none.... It would have been to me a
circumstance of great relief, had I found a
moderate participation of office in the hands
of the majority. I should gladly have left
to time and accident to raise them to their
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>just share. But their total exclusion calls
for prompter corrections. I shall correct
the procedure; but that done, disdain to
follow it. I shall return with joy to that
state of things when the only questions concerning
a candidate shall be, Is he honest?
Is he capable? Is he faithful to the Constitution?</q>
</p>

<p>
The ascendency of Jefferson and of the
Republican party produced a great change
in the government and in national feeling,
but it was a change the most important part
of which was intangible, and is therefore
hard to describe. It was such a change as
takes place in the career of an individual,
when he shakes off some controlling force,
and sets up in life for himself. The common
people felt an independence, a pride, an élan,
which sent a thrill of vigor through every
department of industry and adventure.
</p>

<p>
The simplicity of the forms which President
Jefferson adopted were a symbol to the
national imagination of the change which
had taken place. He gave up the royal custom
of levees; he stopped the celebration
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>of the President’s birthday; he substituted
a written message for the speech to Congress
delivered in person at the Capitol, and
the reply by Congress, delivered in person
at the White House. The President’s residence
ceased to be called the Palace. He
cut down the army and navy. He introduced
economy in all the departments of the
government, and paid off thirty-three millions
of the national debt. He procured the
abolition of internal taxes and the repeal of
the bankruptcy law—two measures which
greatly decreased his own patronage, and
which called forth John Randolph’s encomium
long afterward: <q>I have never seen
but one administration which seriously and
in good faith was disposed to give up its
patronage, and was willing to go farther
than Congress or even the people themselves
... desired; and that was the first administration
of Thomas Jefferson.</q>
</p>

<p>
The two most important measures of the
first administration were, however, the repression
of the Barbary pirates and the
acquisition of Louisiana. Mr. Jefferson’s
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>ineffectual efforts, while he was minister to
France, to put down by force Mediterranean
piracy have already been rehearsed. During
Mr. Adams’s term, two million dollars were
expended in bribing the bucaneers. One
item in the account was as follows, <q>A frigate
to carry thirty-six guns for the Dey of
Algiers;</q> and this frigate went crammed
with a hundred thousand dollars’ worth of
powder, lead, timber, rope, canvas, and other
means of piracy. One hundred and twenty-two
captives came home in that year, 1796,
of whom ten had been held in slavery for
eleven years.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s first important act as President
was to dispatch to the Mediterranean three
frigates and a sloop-of-war to overawe the
pirates, and to cruise in protection of American
commerce. Thus began that series of
events which finally rendered the commerce
of the world as safe from piracy in the
Mediterranean as it was in the British channel.
How brilliantly Decatur and his gallant
comrades carried out this policy, and how at
last the tardy naval powers of Europe fol<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>lowed an example which they ought to have
set, every one is supposed to know.
</p>

<p>
The second important event was the acquisition
of Louisiana. Louisiana meant the
whole territory from the Mississippi River to
the Pacific Ocean, embracing about one million
square miles. All this region belonged
to Spain by right of discovery; and early
in the year 1801 news came from the American
minister at Paris that Spain had ceded
or was about to cede it to France. The
Spanish ownership of the mouth of the Mississippi
had long been a source of annoyance
to the settlers on the Mississippi River; and
it had begun to be felt that the United States
must control New Orleans at least. If this
vast territory should come into the hands of
France, and Napoleon should colonize it, as
was said to be his intention,—France then
being the greatest power in Europe,—the
United States would have a powerful rival on
its borders, and in control of a seaport absolutely
necessary for its commerce. We can
see this now plainly enough, but even so able
a man as Mr. Livingston, the American
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>minister at Paris, did not see it then. On
the contrary, he wrote to the government at
Washington: <q>... I have, however, on all
occasions, declared that as long as France
conforms to the existing treaty between us
and Spain, the government of the United
States does not consider itself as having any
interest in opposing the exchange.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson’s very different view was
expressed in the following letter to Mr.
Livingston: <q>... France, placing herself
in that door, assumes to us the attitude of
defiance. Spain might have retained it quietly
for years. Her pacific disposition, her feeble
state would induce her to increase our facilities
there.... Not so can it ever be in the
hands of France; the impetuosity of her
temper, the energy and restlessness of her
character, placed in a point of eternal friction
with us and our character, which,
though quiet and loving peace and the pursuit
of wealth, is high-minded, despising
wealth in competition with insult or injury,
enterprising and energetic as any nation on
earth,—these circumstances render it im<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>possible that France and the United States
can continue long friends when they meet
in so irritable a position.... The day that
France takes possession of New Orleans fixes
the sentence which is to restrain her forever
within her low-water mark.... From that
moment we must marry ourselves to the
British fleet and nation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus, at a moment’s notice, and in obedience
to a vital change in circumstance, Jefferson
threw aside the policy of a lifetime,
suppressed his liking for France and his dislike
for England, and entered upon that
radically new course which, as he foresaw,
the interests of the United States would require.
</p>

<p>
Livingston, thus primed, began negotiations
for the purchase of New Orleans; and
Jefferson hastily dispatched Monroe, as a
special envoy, for the same purpose, armed,
it is supposed, with secret verbal instructions,
to buy, if possible, not only New Orleans,
but the whole of Louisiana. Monroe had
not a word in writing to show that in purchasing
Louisiana—if the act should be
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>repudiated by the nation—he did not exceed
his instructions. But, as Mr. Henry
Adams remarks, <q>Jefferson’s friends always
trusted him perfectly.</q>
</p>

<p>
The moment was most propitious, for
England and France were about to close in
that terrific struggle which ended at Waterloo,
and Napoleon was desperately in need of
money. After some haggling the bargain
was concluded, and, for the very moderate
sum of fifteen million dollars, the United
States became possessed of a territory which
more than doubled its area.
</p>

<p>
The purchase of Louisiana was confessedly
an unconstitutional, or at least an extra-constitutional
act, for the Constitution gave no
authority to the President to acquire new
territory, or to pledge the credit of the
United States in payment. Jefferson himself
thought that the Constitution ought to
be amended in order to make the purchase
legal; but in this he was overruled by his
advisers.
</p>

<p>
Thus, Jefferson’s first administration ended
with a brilliant achievement; but this public
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>glory was far more than outweighed by a private
loss. The President’s younger daughter,
Mrs. Eppes, died in April, 1804; and
in a letter to his old friend, John Page,
he said: <q>Others may lose of their abundance,
but I, of my wants, have, lost even
the half of all I had. My evening prospects
now hang on the slender thread of a single
life. Perhaps I may be destined to see even
this last cord of parental affection broken.
The hope with which I have looked forward
to the moment when, resigning public cares
to younger hands, I was to retire to that
domestic comfort from which the last great
step is to be taken, is fearfully blighted.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>
<index index="toc" level1="XI. Second Presidential Term"/><index index="pdf" level1="XI. Second Presidential Term"/>
<head>XI</head>

<head type="sub">SECOND PRESIDENTIAL TERM</head>

<p>
The purchase of Louisiana increased Jefferson’s
popularity, and in 1805, at the age
of sixty-two, he was elected to his second term
as President by an overwhelming majority.
Even Massachusetts was carried by the Republicans,
and the total vote in the electoral
college stood: 162 for Jefferson and Clinton;
14 for C. C. Pinckney and Rufus
King, the Federal candidates.
</p>

<p>
This result was due in part to the fact
that Jefferson had stolen the thunder of the
Federalists. His Louisiana purchase, though
bitterly opposed by the leading Federalists,
who were blinded by their hatred of the
President, was far more consonant with Federal
than with Republican principles; and in
his second inaugural address Jefferson went
even farther in the direction of a strong central
government, for he said: <q>Redemption
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>once effected, the revenue thereby liberated
may, by a just repartition among the States,
and a corresponding amendment of the Constitution,
be applied <hi rend="italic">in time of peace</hi> to
rivers, canals, roads, arts, manufactures, education,
and other great objects within each
State. In time of war, ... aided by other
measures reserved for that crisis, it may meet
within the year all the expenses of the year
without encroaching on the rights of future
generations by burdening them with the debts
of the past.</q>
</p>

<p>
This proposal flatly contradicted what the
President had said in his first inaugural address,
and was in strange contrast with his
criticism made years before upon a similar
Federal scheme of public improvement, that
the mines of Peru would not supply the
moneys which would be wasted on this object.
In later years, after his permanent
retirement to Monticello, Jefferson seems to
have reverted to his earlier views, and he
condemned the measures of John Quincy
Adams for making public improvements with
national funds.
</p>

<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>

<p>
But the President was no longer to enjoy
a smooth course. One domestic affair gave
him much annoyance, and our foreign relations
were a continual source of anxiety and
mortification.
</p>

<p>
Aaron Burr had been a brilliant soldier
of the Revolution, a highly successful lawyer
and politician, and finally, during Mr. Jefferson’s
first administration, Vice-President
of the United States. But in the year 1805
he found himself, owing to a complication of
causes, most of which, however, could be
traced to his own moral defects, a bankrupt
in reputation and in purse. Such being his
condition, he applied to the President for
a foreign appointment; and Mr. Jefferson
very properly refused it, frankly explaining
that Burr, whether justly or unjustly, had
lost the confidence of the public.
</p>

<p>
Burr took this rebuff with the easy good-humor
which characterized him, dined with
the President a few days later, and then
started westward to carry out a scheme which
he had been preparing for a year. His plans
were so shrouded in mystery that it is diffi<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>cult to say exactly what they were, but it is
certain that he contemplated an expedition
against Mexico, with the intention of making
himself the ruler of that country; and
it is possible that he hoped to capture New
Orleans, and, after dividing the United
States, to annex the western half to his
Mexican empire. Burr had got together a
small supply of men and arms, and he floated
down the Ohio, gathering recruits as he went.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson, with his usual good sense, perceived
the futility of Burr’s designs, which
were based upon a false belief as to the want
of loyalty among the western people; but he
took all needful precautions. General Wilkinson
was ordered to protect New Orleans,
Burr’s proceedings were denounced by a
proclamation, and finally Burr himself was
arrested in Alabama, and brought to Richmond
for trial.
</p>

<p>
The trial at once became a political affair,
the Federalists, to spite the President, making
Burr’s cause their own, though he had
killed Alexander Hamilton but three years
before, and pretending to regard him as an
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>innocent man persecuted by the President
for political reasons. Jefferson himself took
a hand in the prosecution to the extent of
writing letters to the district attorney full of
advice and suggestions. It would have been
more dignified had he held aloof, but the
provocation which he received was very great.
Burr and his counsel used every possible
means of throwing odium upon the President;
and in this they were assisted by Chief
Justice Marshall, who presided at the trial.
Marshall, though in the main a just man,
was bitterly opposed to Jefferson in political
affairs, and in this case he harshly blamed
the executive for not procuring evidence with
a celerity which, under the circumstances,
was impossible. He also summoned the
President into court as a witness. The President,
however, declined to attend, and the
matter was not pressed. Burr was acquitted,
chiefly on technical grounds.
</p>

<p>
The Burr affair, however, was but a trifle
compared with the difficulties arising from
our relations with England. That country
had always asserted over the United States
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>the right of impressment, a right, namely, to
search American ships, and to take therefrom
any Englishmen found among the crew. In
many cases, Englishmen who had been naturalized
in the United States were thus taken.
This alleged right had always been denied
by the United States, and British perseverance
in it finally led to the war of 1812.
</p>

<p>
Another source of contention was the neutral
trade. During the European wars in
the early part of the century the seaport
towns of the United States did an immense
and profitable business in carrying goods to
European ports, and from one European port
to another. Great Britain, after various
attempts to discourage American commerce
with her enemies, undertook to put it down
by confiscating vessels of the United States
on the ground that their cargoes were not
neutral but belligerent property,—the property,
that is, of nations at war with Great
Britain. And, no doubt, in some cases this
was the fact,—foreign merchandise having
been imported to this country to get a neutral
name for it, and thence exported to a
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>country to which it could not have been
shipped directly from its place of origin. In
April, 1806, the President dispatched Mr.
Monroe to London in order, if possible, to
settle these disputed matters by a treaty.
Monroe, in conjunction with Mr. Pinckney,
our minister to England, sent back a treaty
which contained no reference whatever to
the matter of impressments. It was the best
treaty which they could obtain, but it was
silent upon this vital point.
</p>

<p>
The situation was a perilous one; England
had fought the battle of Trafalgar the
year before; and was now able to carry
everything before her upon the high seas.
Nevertheless, the President’s conduct was
bold and prompt. The treaty had been negotiated
mainly by his own envoy and friend,
Monroe, and great pressure was exerted in
favor of it,—especially by the merchants
and shipowners of the east. But Jefferson
refused even to lay it before the Senate,
and at once sent it back to England. His
position, and history has justified it, was
that to accept a treaty which might be con<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>strued as tacitly admitting the right of impressment
would be a disgrace to the country.
The other questions at issue were more
nearly legal and technical, but this one
touched the national honor; and with the
same right instinct which Jefferson showed
in 1807, the people of the United States,
five years later, fixed upon this grievance,
out of the fog in which diplomacy had enveloped
our relations with England, as the
true and sufficient cause of the war of 1812.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, Jefferson treated Monroe
with the greatest consideration. At this
period Monroe and Madison were both
candidates for the Republican nomination
for the presidency. Jefferson’s choice was
Madison, but he remained impartial between
them; and he withheld Monroe’s treaty from
publication at a time when to publish it would
have given a fatal blow to Monroe’s prospects.
In every way, in fact, he exerted himself to
disguise and soften Monroe’s discredit.
</p>

<p>
The wisdom of Jefferson’s course as to the
treaty was shown before three months had
elapsed by an act of British aggression, which,
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>had the Monroe treaty been accepted, might
fairly have been laid to its door. In June,
1807, the British frigate Leopard, having
been refused permission to search the American
frigate Chesapeake, fired upon the Chesapeake,
which was totally unprepared for
action, and, after killing three men and
wounding eighteen, refused to accept the
surrender of the ship, but carried off three
alleged deserters.
</p>

<p>
This event roused a storm of indignation,
which never quite subsided until the insult
had been effaced by the blood which was
shed in the war of 1812. <q>For the first
time in their history,</q> says Mr. Henry Adams,
<q>the people of the United States learned in
June, 1807, the feeling of a true national
emotion.</q> <q>Never since the battle of Lexington,</q>
wrote Jefferson, <q>have I seen this
country in such a state of exasperation as at
present.</q>
</p>

<p>
War might easily have been precipitated,
had Jefferson been carried away by the popular
excitement. He immediately dispatched
a frigate to England demanding reparation,
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>and he issued a proclamation forbidding all
British men-of-war to enter the waters of the
United States, unless in distress or bearing
dispatches. Jefferson expected war, but he
meant to delay it for a while.
</p>

<p>
To his son-in-law, John Eppes, he wrote:
<q>Reason and the usage of civilized nations
require that we should give them an opportunity
of disavowal and reparation. Our
own interests, too, the very means of making
war, require that we should give time to our
merchants to gather in their vessels and
property and our seamen now afloat.</q>
</p>

<p>
Gallatin, the Secretary of the Treasury,
even criticised the President’s annual message
at this time as being too warlike and <q>not
in the style of the proclamation, which has
been almost universally approved at home
and abroad.</q> It cannot truly be said, therefore,
that Jefferson had any unconquerable
aversion to war.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Canning, the British Foreign Minister,
went through the form of expressing his
regrets for the Chesapeake affair, and sent a
special envoy to Washington to settle the
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>difficulty. Reparation was made at last, but
not till the year 1811.
</p>

<p>
In the mean time, both Great Britain and
France had given other causes of offense,
which may be summarized as follows: In
May, 1806, Great Britain declared the
French ports from Brest to the Elbe closed to
American as to all other shipping. In the
following November, Napoleon retorted with
a decree issued from Berlin, prohibiting all
commerce with Great Britain. That power
immediately forbade the coasting trade between
one port and another in the possession
of her enemies. And in November, 1807,
Great Britain issued the famous Orders in
Council, which forbade all trade whatsoever
with France and her allies, except on payment
of a tribute to Great Britain, each vessel to
pay according to the value of its cargo. Then
followed Napoleon’s Milan decree prohibiting
trade with Great Britain, and declaring that
all vessels which paid the tribute demanded
were lawful prizes to the French marine.
</p>

<p>
Such was the series of acts which assailed
the foreign commerce of the United States,
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>and wounded the national honor by attempting
to prostrate the country at the mercy of
the European powers. Diplomacy had been
exhausted. The Chesapeake affair, the right
of impressment, the British decrees and orders
directed against our commerce,—all these
causes of offense had been tangled into a
complication which no man could unravel.
Retaliation on our part had become absolutely
necessary. What form should it take? Jefferson
rejected war, and proposed an embargo
which prohibited commerce between
the United States and Europe. The measure
was bitterly opposed by the New England
Federalists; but the President’s influence
was so great that Congress adopted it
almost without discussion.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s design, to use his own words,
was <q>to introduce between nations another
umpire than arms;</q> and he expected that
England would be starved into submission.
The annual British exports to the United
States amounted to $50,000,000. Cutting
off this trade meant the throwing out of
work of thousands of British sailors and tens
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>of thousands of British factory hands, who
had no other means of livelihood. Mr. Jefferson
felt confident that the starvation of
this class would bring such pressure to bear
upon the English government, then engaged
in a death struggle with Bonaparte, that it
would be forced to repeal the laws which
obstructed American commerce. It is possible
that this would have been the result
had the embargo been observed faithfully
by all citizens of the United States. Jefferson
maintained till the day of his death that
such would have been the case; and Madison,
no enthusiast, long afterward asserted
that the American state department had
proofs that the English government was on
the point of yielding. The embargo pressed
hardest of all upon Virginia, for it stopped
the exportation of her staples,—wheat and
tobacco. It brought about, by the way, the
financial ruin of Jefferson himself and of his
son-in-law, Colonel Randolph. But the Virginians
bore it without a murmur. <q>They
drained the poison which their own President
held obstinately to their lips.</q>
</p>

<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>

<p>
It was otherwise in New England. There
the disastrous effect of the embargo was not
only indirect but direct. The New England
farmers, it is true, could at least exist
upon the produce of their farms; but the
mariners, the sea-captains, and the merchants
of the coast towns, saw a total suspension of
the industry by which they lived. New
England evaded the embargo by smuggling,
and resisted it tooth and nail. Some of the
Federal leaders in that section believing, or
pretending to believe, that it was a pro-French
measure, were in secret correspondence
with the British government, and meditated
a secession of the eastern States from
the rest of the country. They went so far,
in private conversation at least, as to maintain
the British right of impressment; and
even the Orders in Council were defended
by Gardenier, a leading Federalist, and a
member of Congress.
</p>

<p>
The present generation has witnessed a
similar exhibition of anglomania, when, upon
the assertion of the Monroe doctrine in respect
to Venezuela, by President Cleveland,
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>his attitude was criticised more severely by
a group in New York and Boston than it
was by the English themselves.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s effort to enforce the embargo
and his calm resistance to New England
fury showed extraordinary firmness of will
and tenacity of purpose. In August, 1808,
he wrote to General Dearborn, Secretary of
War, who was then in Maine: <q>The Tories
of Boston openly threaten insurrection if
their importation of flour is stopped. The
next post will stop it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Blood was soon shed; but Jefferson did
not shrink. The army was stationed along
the Canadian frontier, to prevent smuggling;
gunboats and frigates patrolled the coast.
The embargo failed; but Mr. Henry Adams,
the ablest and fairest historian of this period,
declares that it <q>was an experiment in politics
well worth making. In the scheme of
President Jefferson, non-intercourse was the
substitute for war.... Failure of the embargo
meant in his mind not only a recurrence
to the practice of war, but to every
political and social evil that war had always
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>brought in its train. In such a case the
crimes and corruptions of Europe, which
had been the object of his political fears,
must, as he believed, sooner or later, teem
in the fat soil of America. To avert a disaster
so vast was a proper motive for statesmanship,
and justified disregard for smaller
interests.</q> Mr. Parton observes, with almost
as much truth as humor, that the
embargo was approved by the two highest
authorities in Europe, namely, Napoleon
Bonaparte and the <q>Edinburgh Review.</q>
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the fundamental error in Jefferson’s
theory was that nations are governed
mainly by motives of self-interest. He
thought that England would cease to legislate
against American commerce, when it
was once made plain that such a course was
prejudicial to her own interests. But nations,
like individuals, are influenced in their
relations to others far more by pride and
patriotism, and even by prejudice, than by
material self-interest. The only way in
which America could win respect and fair
treatment from Europe was by fighting, or
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>at least by showing a perfect readiness to
fight. This she did by the war of 1812.
</p>

<p>
The embargo was an academic policy,—the
policy of a philosopher rather than that
of a practical man of affairs. Turreau, the
French ambassador, wrote to Talleyrand,
in May, 1806, that the President <q>has little
energy and still less of that audacity which
is indispensable in a place so eminent, whatever
may be the form of government. The
slightest event makes him lose his balance,
and he does not even know how to disguise
the impression which he receives.... He
has made himself ill, and has grown ten
years older.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson had energy and audacity,—but
he was energetic and audacious only by fits
and starts. He was too sensitive, too full of
ideas, too far-sighted, too conscious of all
possible results for a man of action. During
the last three months of his term he made
no attempt to settle the difficulties in which
the country was involved, declaring that he
felt bound to do nothing which might embarrass
his successor. But it may be doubted
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>if he did not unconsciously decline the task
rather from its difficulty than because he
felt precluded from undertaking it. Self-knowledge
was never Mr. Jefferson’s strong
point.
</p>

<p>
But he had done his best, and if his
scheme had failed, the failure was not an
ignoble one. He was still the most beloved,
as well as the best hated man in the United
States; and he could have had a third term,
if he would have taken it.
</p>

<p>
He retired, permanently, as it proved, to
Monticello, wearied and harassed, but glad
to be back on his farm, in the bosom of his
family, and among his neighbors. His fellow-citizens
of Albemarle County desired to
meet the returning President, and escort
him to his home; but Mr. Jefferson, characteristically,
avoided this demonstration, and
received instead an address, to which he
made a reply that closed in a fit and pathetic
manner his public career. <q>... The
part which I have acted on the theatre of
public life has been before them [his countrymen],
and to their sentence I submit it;
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>but the testimony of my native county, of
the individuals who have known me in
private life, to my conduct in its various
duties and relations, is the more grateful as
proceeding from eyewitnesses and observers,
from triers of the vicinage. Of you, then,
my neighbors, I may ask in the face of the
world, <q>whose ox have I taken, or whom
have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed,
or of whose hand have I received a bribe to
blind mine eyes therewith?</q> On your verdict
I rest with conscious security.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>
<index index="toc" level1="XII. A Public Man in Private Life"/><index index="pdf" level1="XII. A Public Man in Private Life"/>
<head>XII</head>

<head type="sub">A PUBLIC MAN IN PRIVATE LIFE</head>

<p>
Jefferson’s second term as President
ended March 4, 1809, and during the rest
of his life he lived at Monticello, with occasional
visits to his more retired estate at Poplar
Forest, and to the homes of his friends,
but never going beyond the confines of Virginia.
Just before leaving Washington, he
had written: <q>Never did a prisoner released
from his chains feel such relief as I shall on
shaking off the shackles of power. Nature
intended me for the tranquil pursuits of science
by rendering them my supreme delight.
But the enormities of the times in which
I have lived have forced me to take a part
in resisting them, and to commit myself on
the boisterous ocean of political passions.</q>
</p>

<p>
Though no longer in office, Jefferson remained
till his death the chief personage in
the United States, and his authority continued
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>to be almost supreme among the leaders as
well as among the rank and file of the Republican
party. Madison first, and Monroe
afterward, consulted him in all the most
important matters which arose during the
sixteen years of their double terms as President.
Long and frequent letters passed between
them; and both Madison and Monroe
often visited Jefferson at Monticello.
</p>

<p>
The Monroe doctrine, as it is called, was
first broached by Jefferson. In a letter of
August 4, 1820, to William Short, he
said: <q>The day is not far distant, when we
may formally require a meridian through
the ocean which separates the two hemispheres
on the hither side of which no
European gun shall ever be heard, nor an
American on the other;</q> and he spoke of
<q>the essential policy of interdicting in the
seas and territories of both Americas the
ferocious and sanguinary contests of Europe.</q>
Later, when applied to by Monroe himself,
in October, 1823, Jefferson wrote to him:
<q>Our first and fundamental maxim should
be never to entangle ourselves in the broils
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>of Europe. Our second, never to suffer
Europe to meddle in cisatlantic affairs.</q>
The whole letter, a long one, deserves to be
read as the first exposition of what has since
become a famous doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The darling object of Mr. Jefferson’s last
years was the founding of the University of
Virginia at Charlottesville. For this purpose
he gave $1000; many of his neighbors
in Albemarle County joined him with gifts;
and through Jefferson’s influence, the legislature
appropriated considerable sums. But
money was the least of Jefferson’s endowment
of the University. He gave of the maturity
of his judgment and a great part of
his time. He was made regent. He drew
the plans for the buildings, and overlooked
their construction, riding to the University
grounds almost every day, a distance of four
miles, and back, and watching with paternal
solicitude the laying of every brick and
stone. His design was the perhaps over-ambitious
one of displaying in the University
buildings the various leading styles of
architecture; and certain practical inconven<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>iences, such as the entire absence of closets
from the houses of the professors, marred
the result. Some offense also was given to
the more religious people of Virginia, by the
selection of a Unitarian as the first professor.
However, Jefferson’s enthusiasm, ingenuity,
and thoroughness carried the scheme through
with success; and the University still stands
as a monument to its founder.
</p>

<p>
It should be recorded, moreover, that
under Jefferson’s regency the University of
Virginia adopted certain reforms, which even
Harvard, the most progressive of eastern
universities, did not attain till more than
half a century later. These were, an elective
system of studies; the abolition of rules and
penalties for the preservation of order, and
the abolition of compulsory attendance at
religious services.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Jefferson’s daily life was simple and
methodical. He rose as soon as it was light
enough for him to see the hands of a clock
which was opposite his bed. Till breakfast
time, which was about nine o’clock, he
employed himself in writing. The whole
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>morning was devoted to an immense correspondence;
the discharge of which was not
only mentally, but physically distressing,
inasmuch as his crippled hands, each wrist
having been fractured, could not be used
without pain. In a letter to his old friend,
John Adams, he wrote: <q>I can read by
candle-light only, and stealing long hours
from my rest; nor would that time be indulged
to me could I by that light see to
write. From sunrise to one or two o’clock,
and often from dinner to dark, I am drudging
at the writing-table. And all this to
answer letters, in which neither interest nor
inclination on my part enters; and often
from persons whose names I have never
before heard. Yet writing civilly, it is hard
to refuse them civil answers.</q> At his death
Jefferson left copies of 16,000 letters, being
only a part of those written by himself, and
26,000 letters written by others to him.
</p>

<p>
At one o’clock he set out upon horseback,
and was gone for one or two hours,—never
attended by a servant, even when he became
old and infirm. He continued these rides
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>until he had become so feeble that he had
to be lifted to the saddle; and his mount
was always a fiery one. Once, in Mr. Jefferson’s
old age, news came that a serious
accident had happened in the neighboring
village to one of his grandsons. Immediately
he ordered his horse to be brought
round, and though it was night and very
dark, he mounted, despite the protests of
the household, and, at a run, dashed down
the steep ascent by which Monticello is
reached. The family held their breath till
the tramp of his horse’s feet, on the level
ground below, could faintly be heard.
</p>

<p>
At half past three or four he dined; and
at six he returned to the drawing-room,
where coffee was served. The evening was
spent in reading or conversation, and at
nine he went to bed. <q>His diet,</q> relates a
distinguished visitor, Daniel Webster, <q>is
simple, but he seems restrained only by his
taste. His breakfast is tea and coffee, bread
always fresh from the oven, of which he
does not seem afraid, with at times a slight
accompaniment of cold meat. He enjoys
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>his dinner well, taking with his meat a large
proportion of vegetables.</q> The fact is that
he used meat only as a sort of condiment to
vegetables. <q>He has a strong preference
for the wines of the continent, of which he
has many sorts of excellent quality....
Dinner is served in half Virginian, half
French style, in good taste and abundance.
No wine is put on the table till the cloth is
removed. In conversation, Mr. Jefferson is
easy and natural, and apparently not ambitious;
it is not loud as challenging general
attention, but usually addressed to the person
next him.</q> His health remained good till
within a few months of his death, and he
never lost a tooth.
</p>

<p>
Scarcely less burdensome than his correspondence
was the throng of visitors at Monticello,
of all nationalities, from every State
in the Union, some coming from veneration,
some from curiosity, some from a desire to
obtain free quarters. Groups of people often
stood about the house and in the halls to see
Jefferson pass from his study to his dining-room.
It is recorded that <q>a female once
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>punched through a window-pane of the house
with her parasol to get a better view of him.</q>
As many as fifty guests sometimes lodged
in the house. <q>As a specimen of Virginia
life,</q> relates one biographer, <q>we will
mention that a friend from abroad came to
Monticello, with a family of six persons, and
remained ten months.... Accomplished
young kinswomen habitually passed two or
three of the summer months there, as they
would now at a fashionable watering-place.
They married the sons of Mr. Jefferson’s
friends, and then came with their families.</q>
</p>

<p>
The immense expense entailed by these
hospitalities, added to the debt, amounting
to $20,000, which Mr. Jefferson owed when
he left Washington, crippled him financially.
Moreover, Colonel Randolph, who managed
his estate for many years, though a good
farmer, was a poor man of business. It was
a common saying in the neighborhood that
nobody raised better crops or got less money
for them than Colonel Randolph. The embargo,
and the period of depression which
followed the war of 1812, went far to impov<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>erish the Virginia planters. Monroe died
a bankrupt, and Madison’s widow was left
almost in want of bread. Jefferson himself
wrote in 1814: <q>What can we raise for the
market? Wheat? we can only give it to our
horses, as we have been doing since harvest.
Tobacco? It is not worth the pipe it is
smoked in. Some say whiskey, but all mankind
must become drunkards to consume it.</q>
Jefferson, also, was so anxious lest his slaves
should be overworked, that the amount of
labor performed upon his plantation was
much less than it should have been. And,
to cap the climax of his financial troubles, he
lost $20,000 by indorsing to that amount
for his intimate friend, Governor Nicholas,
an honorable but unfortunate man. It
should be added that Mr. Nicholas, in his last
hours, <q>declared with unspeakable emotion
that Mr. Jefferson had never by a word, by
a look, or in any other way, made any allusion
to his loss by him.</q>
</p>

<p>
In 1814, Mr. Jefferson sold his library
to Congress for $23,950, about one half its
cost; and in the very year of his death he
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>requested of the Virginia legislature that a
law might be passed permitting him to sell
some of his farms by means of a lottery,—the
times being such that they could be
disposed of in no other way. He even published
some <q>Thoughts on Lotteries,</q>—by
way of advancing this project. The legislature
granted his request, with reluctance;
but in the mean time his necessities became
known throughout the country, and subscriptions
were made for his relief. The lottery
was suspended, and Jefferson died in the
belief that Monticello would be saved as a
home for his family.
</p>

<p>
In March, 1826, Mr. Jefferson’s health
began to fail; but so late as June 24 he
was well enough to write a long letter in
reply to an invitation to attend the fiftieth
celebration, at Washington, of the 4th of
July. During the 3d of July he dozed hour
after hour under the influence of opiates,
rousing occasionally, and uttering a few
words. It was evident that his end was
very near. His family and he himself fervently
desired that he might live till the 4th
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>of July. At eleven in the evening of July 3
he whispered to Mr. Trist, the husband of
one of his granddaughters, who sat by him:
<q>This is the fourth?</q> Not bearing to disappoint
him, Mr. Trist remained silent; and
Mr. Jefferson feebly asked a second time:
<q>This is the fourth?</q> Mr. Trist nodded assent.
<q>Ah!</q> he breathed, and sank into a
slumber from which he never awoke; but his
end did not come till half past twelve in the
afternoon of Independence Day. On the
same day, at Quincy, died John Adams, his
last words being, <q>Thomas Jefferson still
lives!</q>
</p>

<p>
The double coincidence made a strong impression
upon the imagination of the American
people. <q>When it became known,</q> says
Mr. Parton, <q>that the author of the Declaration
and its most powerful defender had
both breathed their last on the Fourth of
July, the fiftieth since they had set it apart
from the roll of common days, it seemed as
if Heaven had given its visible and unerring
sanction to the work which they had done.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s body was buried at Monticello,
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>and on the tombstone is inscribed, as he
desired, the following: <q>Here was buried
Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration
of American Independence, of the Statute of
Virginia for Religious Freedom, and Father
of the University of Virginia.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jefferson’s expectation that Monticello
would remain the property of his descendants
was not fulfilled. His debts were paid
to the uttermost farthing by his executor
and grandson, Thomas Jefferson Randolph;
but Martha Randolph and her family were
left homeless and penniless. When this became
known, the legislatures of South Carolina
and Louisiana each voted to Mrs. Randolph
a gift of $10,000. She died suddenly,
in 1836, at the age of sixty-three. Monticello
passed into the hands of strangers.
</p>

<p>
Jefferson had his faults and defects. As
a statesman and ruler, he showed at times
irresolution, want of energy and of audacity,
and a misunderstanding of human nature;
and at times his judgment was clouded by
the political prejudices which were common
in his day. His attitude in the X Y Z
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>business, his embargo policy, and his policy
or want of policy after the failure of the
embargo,—in these cases, and perhaps in
these alone, his defects are exhibited. It
is certain also that although at times frank
and outspoken to a fault, he was at other
times over-complaisant and insincere. To
Aaron Burr, for example, he expressed himself
in terms of friendship which he could
hardly have felt; and, once, in writing to a
minister of the gospel he implied, upon his
own part, a belief in revelation which he did
not really feel. It seems to be true also that
Jefferson had an overweening desire to win
the approbation of his fellow-countrymen;
and at times, though quite unconsciously to
himself, this motive led him into courses
which were rather selfish than patriotic.
This was the case, perhaps, in his negotiations
with the English minister after the failure
of the embargo. It is charged against
him, also, that he avoided unpleasant situations;
and that he said or did nothing to
check the Republican slanders which were
cast upon Washington and upon John
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>Adams. But when this much has been
said, all has been said. As a citizen, husband,
father, friend, and master, Jefferson
was almost an ideal character. No man was
ever more kind, more amiable, more tender,
more just, more generous. To her children,
Mrs. Randolph declared that never, never
had she witnessed a <hi rend="italic">particle</hi> of injustice in
her father,—never had she heard him say a
word or seen him do an act which she at the
time or afterward regretted. He was magnanimous,—as
when he frankly forgave
John Adams for the injustice of his midnight
appointments. Though easily provoked,
he never bore malice. In matters of
business and in matters of politics he was
punctiliously honorable. How many times
he paid his British debt has already been related.
On one occasion he drew his cheque
to pay the duties on certain imported wines
which might have come in free,—yet made
no merit of the action, for it never came to
light until long after his death. In the presidential
campaigns when he was a candidate,
he never wrote a letter or made a sign
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>to influence the result. He would not say
a word by way of promise in 1801, when a
word would have given him the presidency,
and when so honorable a man as John Adams
thought that he did wrong to withhold it.
There was no vanity or smallness in his
character. It was he and not Dickinson
who wrote the address to the King, set forth
by the Continental Congress of 1775; but
Dickinson enjoyed the fame of it throughout
Jefferson’s lifetime.
</p>

<p>
Above all, he was patriotic and conscientious.
When he lapsed, it was in some
subordinate matter, and because a little self-deception
clouded his sight. But in all important
matters, in all emergencies, he stood
firm as a rock for what he considered to
be right, unmoved by the entreaties of his
friends or by the jeers, threats, and taunts of
his enemies. He shrank with almost feminine
repugnance from censure and turmoil,
but when the occasion demanded it, he
faced even these with perfect courage and
resolution. His course as Secretary of State,
and his enforcement of the embargo, are
examples.
</p>

<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>

<p>
Jefferson’s political career was bottomed
upon a great principle which he never, for
one moment, lost sight of or doubted, no
matter how difficult the present, or how dark
the future. He believed in the people, in
their capacity for self-government, and in their
right to enjoy it. This belief shaped his
course, and, in spite of minor inconsistencies,
made it consistent. It was on account of
this belief, and of the faith and courage with
which he put it in practice, that he became
the idol of his countrymen, and attained a
unique position in the history of the world.
</p>
        </div></body>
        <back>
<div>
            <pgIf output="pdf">
                <then/>
                <else>
                    <div id="footnotes" rend="page-break-before: right">
                        <head>Footnotes</head>
                        <divGen type="footnotes"/>
                    </div>
                </else>
            </pgIf>
            </div>
<div rend="page-break-before:right; x-class: boxed">
                <index index="pdf"/><index index="toc"/>
                <head>Transcriber’s Note</head>
                <pgIf output="txt"><then><p>Italic type is marked by underscore (_), black letter by asterisk (*).</p></then>
                <else><p>Black letter has been rendered as boldface.</p></else>
                </pgIf>
                
                <p>The following changes have been made to the text:</p>
            <list>
                <item><ref target="corr065">page 65</ref>, <q>Charlotteville</q> changed to <q>Charlottesville</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr073">page 73</ref>, <q>goverment</q> changed to <q>government</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr093">page 93</ref>, <q>1795</q> changed to <q>1793</q></item>
                <item><ref target="corr098">page 98</ref>, <q>circumtances</q> changed to <q>circumstances</q></item>
                </list>
                <p>Both <q>draught</q> and <q>draft</q> are used in the text.</p>
</div>
            <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
